The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scrap Book of Mormon Literature, Volume 2
(of 2), by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Scrap Book of Mormon Literature, Volume 2 (of 2)
       Religious Tracts

Author: Various

Contributor: B. H. Roberts
             Joseph Fielding Smith
             Orson Pratt
             Orson F. Whitney

Release Date: March 8, 2017 [EBook #54298]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCRAP BOOK OF MORMON LITERATURE, VOL 2 ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Margaret
Willden and Mariah Averett






SCRAP BOOK OF MORMON LITERATURE


VOL. II


Religious Tracts

Published by

Ben. E. Rich


  "_We have gathered posies,
  From other men's flowers;
  Nothing but the thread that
  Binds them is ours_."

{i}



GENERAL INDEX

STATEMENT FROM JOSIAH QUINCY, MAYOR OF BOSTON, 1845-1849, CONCERNING AN
INTERVIEW HAD IN 1844 WITH JOSEPH SMITH, THE MORMON PROPHET: Some of
the Sayings and Predictions Made by the Prophet Joseph Smith--A Letter
to Mr. Wentworth from the Prophet in Answer to a Request from Him for
a Statement of Belief, to Be Published in the Chicago "Democrat"--The
Prophet's Assassination--Extracts from Governor Ford's History of
Illinois Concerning the Martyrdom, with Comments.--Compiled by Ben. E.
Rich, 3.

DEDICATION OF PALESTINE: The Prayer.--By Apostle Orson Hyde, 36.

THE RESURRECTION: Purpose of Man's Existence--Component Parts of Body
Never Destroyed--Literal Resurrection--Testimony of Resurrection
by Ezekiel, Job, Daniel, Luke, John, Matthew, Paul--Book of Mormon
Prophet's Testimony of the Resurrection, Abinadi, Jacob, Amulek, Alma,
Samuel, Words of Jesus, Moroni--Testimony of Joseph Smith--Extract from
the Prophecy of Enoch.--By President Brigham Young, 40.

CELESTIAL FAMILY ORGANIZATION.--By Parley P. Pratt in His Publication,
"The Prophet," published in New York City, 1845, 52.

SALVATION FOR THE LIVING AND THE DEAD: Liberality of the "Mormon"
Faith--Characteristics of True Religion--Universal Salvation--But One
God and One Faith--Sincerity Not Conclusive Evidence of Truth--Oneness
of the Church of Christ--True Gospel Again Revealed from Heaven--Gospel
Will Be Preached to Every Soul--But Few Will Be Lost--Salvation for the
Dead--Different Degrees of Glory--Liberality of the Gospel--Everlasting
Punishment--Work in the Spirit World--Cherish No Evil Feeling--A
Discourse by Charles W. Penrose, Delivered in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake
City, Sunday Afternoon, August 19, 1900, 59.

MORMONISM JUDGED BY ITS EFFECTS: Testimony of Converts--Effects of
Mormonism--Preaching the Gospel--Mormons a Happy People--Mormonism
Causes Unity--Education--Natural Benefits Derived from Mormonism--By
Charles W. Penrose, in "Millennial Star," 1886, 78.

{ii} THE "RE-ORGANIZED" CHURCH VS. SALVATION FOR THE DEAD: Claims of
The "Re-organized" Church--Keys for Vicarious Work Restored--Baptism
for Dead Commenced--Temples Built--Keys Bestowed Upon the Twelve
Apostles--Church Rejected with Its Dead--Baptism for the Dead
Discontinued by "Josephites"--Importance of the Work for the Dead--Dead
Judged Out of Records--Prophet Preaches on Work for Dead--Early
Prophets Preached Salvation for the Dead--Necessity of Temples--Sacred
Ordinances Must Be Performed in the Temple--An Editorial from the
"Times and Seasons" Written by the Prophet Joseph Smith on Salvation
for the Dead--By Joseph F. Smith, Jr, 83.

ACKNOWLEDGE YOUR FAULTS.--By Elder Orson F. Whitney, in "Millennial
Star," 1882, 100.

AN INTERVIEW IN THE ATLANTA CONSTITUTION ON THE "MORMON" FAITH: Book of
Mormon--What the Book of Mormon Teaches--First Principles--Gifts of the
Holy Ghost--Prophecy--Authority--Apostasy--Restoration--Organization--
Ecclesiastical Government--Necessity of Baptism--Mode of
Baptism--Infant Baptism--Salvation for the Dead--Eternal and
Everlasting Punishment--Graded Salvation and Damnation--Personality
of the Godhead--Atonement and Fall--Bible Alone Not
Sufficient--Marriage--Morality of the Mormons--Belief in a Personal
Satan--Future Punishment--The Earth to Be Purified--By Elder Ben. E.
Rich, 103.

TWO LETTERS TO A BAPTIST MINISTER: Rev. J. Whitcomb Brougher, Pastor
First Baptist Church, Chattanooga, Tenn., Delivered Two Sermons from
His Pulpit Upon "Mormonism." They were tirades of falsehoods and
misrepresentations from beginning to end; they were filled with much
bitterness and hatred, and during one of his sermons he came as near
advocating mob violence as he dared. These wholesale attacks called
out the following open letters to the minister, which appeared in the
Chattanooga "News." (There were so many calls for copies of these
letters, and to meet the demands they were published in pamphlet form.)
Christ's Church Always Evily Spoken Against--Spaulding Manuscript
Story--Restoration of the Gospel--Christ's Second Coming--The
Existence of a God--God Has a Body, Parts and Passions--Belief in
Many Gods--Is Mormonism a System of Lust--"Mormons" Live in Their Own
Homes--Loyalty of the Mormons--Authority--Are We to a Unity--Baptism Is
Essential--False Charges--Missionary Work--The Book of Mormon--Elder
Ben. E. Rich, 122.

MORMONS AND MORMONISM: The Mormon People, Their Industry, Education
and Morals--What Is Thought of These People by a Non-Mormon of
Many Years Residence Among Them--By Their Fruits--Like the Pilgrim
Fathers--Their Staff and Comfort--What They Accomplished in
Thirty-two Years--Education--Morals--Cause of Persecution--The New
Crusade--Disfranchisement of Mormons--Political Conditions--B. H.
Roberts Case--Lecture by Charles Ellis, a Non-Mormon, 145.

{iii} PROPHETS AND APOSTLES NECESSARY: Tendency of Mankind to Accept
Dead Prophets and Reject Living Ones--Prophecy Fulfilled--Revelation
Necessary--Necessity of Officers in the Church--By the late President
Geo. Q. Cannon, in the "Millennial Star," 1866, 168.

COMPREHENSIVE SALVATION, OR THE GOSPEL TO LIVING
AND DEAD: First Principles--Authority--Miraculous
Gifts--Organization--Apostasy--Restoration--The Gospel Preached to the
Spirits of the Departed--Different Degrees of Glory--Turning the Hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, and the Children to the Fathers--By
John Nicholson, 174.

THE MEANS OF ESCAPE, OR, EXISTING EVILS AND THEIR CURE: Christ's
Second Coming--Restoration--Visions of the Prophet--Priesthood
Restored--Persecution--Growth of the Church--Missionary Work--The
Gathering--By Elder John Nicholson, 195.

THE LATTER DAY PROPHET: Prophets Needed and Should Be
Expected--Organism of the Church of Christ--Effects of Obedience
to the Doctrines Introduced by Joseph Smith--The Book of Mormon
Authentic--Modern Prophecy and Its Fulfilment--By Elder John Nicholson,
200.

THE GOSPEL OPENS COMMUNICATION WITH JEHOVAH: Necessity of
Adversity--Angels Have Appeared in the Last Days--Heaven--Condition of
the World--Paragraphs from a Sermon Delivered by President John Taylor,
June 12, 1853, 221.

A WORD OF ADVICE: Elders' Authority--Their Attitude Toward
Ministers--Rely Upon Spirit of God--Advice to Missionaries--By Elder
Parley P. Pratt, in "Millennial Star," 1846, 226.

A Prophet of Latter Days.

A GLORIOUS THOUGHT: Should Prophets Be Expected in Our Day--God's
Word Indicates that a Prophet Should Come--Prophets Sent to Announce
All Important Events--Positive Promise of the Lord to Send a
Messenger--Necessity of Prophets and Apostles in the Church--Church
Founded Upon Prophets and Apostles--Power Given Apostles and
Prophets--Object of Inspired Men in the Church--How Long They Should
Remain--Is the Canon of Scripture Full--Without Modern Revelation
Bible Prophecies Cannot Be Fulfilled--Treatment of Prophets in Past
Ages--Jesus a Stumbling Stone--Many Prophets Rejected--Persecution
to Follow All Inspired Teachers--Conclusions Drawn from Scriptures
Quoted--Elder Edwin F. Parry, Liverpool, England, 230.

{iv} WAS JOSEPH SMITH A PROPHET? Testimony of His Works--Judging
by the Fruits--Joseph Smith's Claim--His Claim Compared with
Scripture--Predictions that the Gospel Should Be Restored--Joseph
Smith Treated the Same as Ancient Prophets--Account of Some of
His Works--Bible Prophecies Fulfilled--Church Organization the
Same as Formerly--Same Doctrines as in Former Days--The Holy
Ghost Received--How to Obtain Proof--Outward Proofs--Testimony of
Witnesses--Ancient Prophecies Being Fulfilled--The Gathering of
Israel--Gathering Peculiar to Latter-Day Saints--Events in the History
of the Saints--Words of the Psalmist Fulfilled--Isaiah's Prediction
Fulfilled--A Prophecy of Malachi--Salvation for the Dead--Facts
Proven--Elder Edwin F. Parry, Liverpool, England, 235.

JOSEPH SMITH'S WORKS: Evidence of His Inspiration--Scriptural
Tests--Prediction of the Angel--None Can Stop God's Work--"A Marvelous
Work"--Testimony of Disinterested Men--Prophecy About War--Fulfilled
Twenty-eight Years Afterwards--Predicted Men's Lives Would Be
Spared--The Saints' Exodus Foretold--Gathering Predicted--Joseph Smith
as an Expounder of Scripture--Church Organization--All His Works
Proclaim Him a Prophet--Elder Edwin F. Parry, Liverpool, England, 254.

THE BOOK OF MORMON: An Evidence of the Inspiration of Joseph Smith--Its
Purport--Impossible to Write Without Divine Aid--Prophecies in the
Book of Mormon--A Bible! A Bible!--Isaiah's Prophecy--Book Gives
a Test of Its Truth--Attested by Direct Evidence--Testimony of
Three Witnesses--Testimony of Witnesses Unchanged--Testimony of
Eight Witnesses--Secular Proof of the Book of Mormon--Colonists
from the Tower of Babel--Origin Before the Christian Era--Of
Hebrew Origin--Indian Customs--Indian Practice Resembling the
Passover--Tradition of a Sacred Book--Acquainted with the Old Testament
Record--Tradition of Moses--Tradition of Eve--Tradition of the
Flood--Led by Youngest Brother--Engraved on Plates of Metal--Egyptian
Writings--Evidences of Advanced Civilization--Ruins Discovered--Indians
All of One Origin--Ruins in Yucatan--Ancient Glass Jar--A Ruined
City--Ancient Coins and Implements--Destruction at the Time of the
Crucifixion--Ruins on the Ridge of a Mountain--Destroyed by the
Action of Heat--Remains Found Under Lava Beds--Discovery of a Hidden
City--Evidences of Great Eruptions--The Messiah Known to the Ancient
Inhabitants of America--The Cross as an Emblem--Knowledge of the
Godhead--Tradition of the Christ--Strong Proofs of the Truth of the
Book of Mormon--Conclusion--Elder Edwin F. Parry, Liverpool, England,
260.

MARKS OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST: The Outward Signs by Which It May Be
Known--Outward Signs by Which Christ's Gospel May Be Known--Character
of His Church--Knowledge the Outcome of True Faith--How It May Be
Obtained--An Illustration--Parable of the Sower--Where Is the True
Gospel and Church of Christ?--By Edwin F. Parry, Liverpool, England,
291.

SIGNS OF CHRIST'S SECOND COMING: What the Bible Says Concerning His
Advent--What the Saviour and the Ancient Prophets Say Concerning
It--The Many Things to Take Place Before that Great Event--The Signs
Already Appearing--By Elder Edwin F. Parry, Liverpool, England, 304.

{v} SAVED BY GRACE THROUGH OBEDIENCE: Important Questions Concerning
Salvation Answered by the Word of God--Bible Teachings Upon
This Subject--Important Questions Concerning Salvation Answered
by the Word of God--Salvation Free to All Who Will Obey--Faith
Alone Will Not Save--True Faith Cannot Be Separated from Works of
Obedience--Illustrations of Salvation by Grace--By Elder Edwin F.
Parry, Liverpool, England, 313.

THE BEGINNING OF THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST: Rules That Must Be
Observed by All Who Enter Christ's Church--What Is Salvation--Our Own
Sins--What Is the Gospel--The First Rule--Faith--Nature of Faith--Power
of Faith--Necessity of Miraculous Gifts--Existence of Faith Shown by
Works--Another Evidence of Faith--The Second Rule--Repentance--Meaning
of Repentance--Necessity of Repentance--The Third Rule--Baptism--True
Mode of Baptism--What Baptism Is For--Other Purposes of Baptism--The
Baptism of Infants--Those Who Have Died Without Baptism--Baptism a Test
of Obedience--The Fourth Rule--Laying On of Hands--Necessity of Laying
On of Hands--Office of the Holy Spirit--Rules Herein Explained--By
Elder Edwin F. Parry, Liverpool, England, 321.

AN ANGEL WITH THE GOSPEL: Rev. 14: 6, 7, Analyzed--Angel Moroni's
Mission Not Completed--Angels--Judgments to Come Upon the World--By
Elder Orson Pratt, in "Millennial Star," 1866, 333.

THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH ON DOCTRINE: Extracts from a Sermon Delivered
at Nauvoo, June 27, 1839, Taken from the "Historical Record"--First
Principles--Purpose of the Gifts of Tongues--Resurrection and Eternal
Judgment--Election--Effects of the Holy Ghost Upon Gentiles--Effects of
the Holy Ghost Upon the Seed of Abraham--The Other Comforter, 337.

THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS AND THE WORLD: The Godhead--Testimony of John,
Peter, Stephen--The Personality of God--Testimony of Abraham, Moses,
Thomas, Zechariah, Paul, Joseph Smith--Faith and Works--Testimony
of Paul, John, James--Repentance--Testimony of Paul, Noah, Abraham,
Jonah, John--Water Baptism--Testimony of Paul, John, Nicodemus,
Peter, Paul--The Holy Ghost--Testimony of John the Baptist, John,
Paul--Baptism for the Dead--Testimony of Peter, Paul--Divine
Authority--Testimony of Paul, Peter--By Elder William A. Morton, 340.

A CONGRESSMAN'S OPINION OF THE PROPHET: From the "Historical
Record"--The Prophet in Washington During the Year 1840, 404.

AN ANNOUNCEMENT CONCERNING THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY
SAINTS.--By Heber J. Grant, Tokyo, Japan, 405.

{vi} CORNER STONES OF REORGANIZATION: A Few Facts Concerning Its
Founders Compiled from Early Church History--History of William
Marks--Revelation to James J. Strong Given January 7, 1849--Record
of Zenos H. Gurley--Jason W. Briggs, Another Founder of the New
Organization--Authority--By German E. Ellsworth, 408.

IS BELIEF ALONE SUFFICIENT: Knowledge of God Necessary to Be
Saved--Must Obey the Gospel--Works Necessary--Love Manifest by Keeping
the Commandments--Faith and Works Necessary--By J. H. Paul, 423.

THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS: Its Religion, History,
Condition and Destiny--Antagonism Due to Misrepresentation--The Fulness
of the Everlasting Gospel--The Godhead--Men Judged by Their Works--The
Atonement--The Gospel Ordinances--Faith, Repentance, Baptism--Baptism
for the Dead--The Holy Ghost--Divine Authority--Officers--Spiritual
Gifts--The Apostasy--The Book of Mormon--Revelation--Restoration of the
Gospel--Other Doctrines--A Glance at History--Present Condition--Future
Destiny--The Gospel Message--By James H. Anderson, 1902, 429.

A WORD ABOUT SUCCESSION: From Saturday "News"--Was Not Necessary to
Ordain President Young to Office of President of Church--The Prophet
Intended Hyrum to Be the Next President Had He Lived--All the Keys of
Authority Bestowed Upon the Heads of the Twelve Apostles by Joseph
Smith--Brigham Young Accepted by People as Second President of Church,
460.

THE GOSPEL PIONEER: Faith--Repentance--Baptism--Laying on of Hands
for Imparting the Holy Ghost--Authority to Preach and Administer--By
William Jefferies, 464.

GLAD TIDINGS OF GREAT JOY: Faith in God and Jesus
Christ--Repentance--Baptism--The Holy Ghost--Organization--We Believe
in Continuous Revelation from God--Obey the Doctrine of Christ--By
Apostle George Teasdale, 484.

SUGGESTIONS TO ELDERS: Care in Administering Sacrament--Baptismal
Ceremony--Laying on of Hands and Blessing Sick--Words to Be Used
in Baptizing--Words Used in Confirming a Person a Member of the
Church--Administering to the Sick--Anointing with Oil--By Elder B. H.
Roberts, in "Millennial Star," 1888, 488.

THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST: All Truth Included in the Gospel of Jesus
Christ--The Gospel Plan Comprehends More Than This Planet--Gospel
Taught Prior to Christ's Advent--Faith--Repentance--Baptism by
Immersion--Gift of the Holy Ghost--Only One Gospel Plan--Evidence of
Apostasy--Gospel Plan a Perfect One--Exclusive Plan--Man Saved by
Gaining Knowledge--Faith and Works Necessary--Importance of the Message
of the Humble Elders--By Elder Orson F. Whitney, in "Millennial Star,"
1882, 492.

{vii} THE MISUSE OF POWER.--By Apostle Orson F. Whitney, in Millennial
Star, 1882, 510.

HAPPINESS FOR THE SORROWFUL.--By Apostle Orson Pratt, Millennial Star,
1886, 514.

THE STRAIGHT AND NARROW WAY: Doctrine the Savior Taught--First
Principles--Faith and Works--Repentance--Baptism--Object of
Baptism--Subjects Fit for Baptism--Mode of Baptism--Gift of the Holy
Ghost--The Blood of Christ--Authority--Salvation for the Dead--By Elder
Ephraim H. Nye, 516.

A MOTHER'S INFLUENCE: A Few Words About the Findings and the Birth of
Joseph F. Smith, 535.

IS BAPTISM ESSENTIAL TO SALVATION? 540.

ALLEGED "OBJECTIONABLE FEATURES" IN THE RELIGION OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS:
Discoveries Made in South America Corroborating Claims of the Book of
Mormon--Apostles and Prophets--Signs Following the Believers--Ordinance
of Baptism Changed--By Elder Charles W. Staynor, 542.

LATTER-DAY SAINTS FOLLOW THE TEACHINGS OF THE SAVIOUR: Address
Delivered at the Salt Lake Tabernacle Sunday, December 25, 1910,
by President Joseph F. Smith--Adam's Mission on Earth--Temporal
Death--Coming of Christ--The Second Death--Christ Both God and
Man--First Born in the Spirit, Only Begotten of the Father in the
Flesh, Immortal Father, Mortal Mother, thus Were Joined Together
in Him Forever, Both God and Man--Resurrection--Spirit and Body of
Christ--Preaching to Spirits in Prison--Broadness of God's Plan of
Salvation--All Will Be Resurrected--Free Agency of Man--Saviour in
America--Elements of Spirituality--Book of Mormon--Doctrines of
Christ--Saviour's Birthday, 554.

{viii}



DOCTRINAL INDEX

Adam's mission on earth, 554.

Adam taught to offer sacrifice, 556.

Administering to Sick, 490.

Adversity, Necessity of, 222.

Ancient Prophets predict Christ's Second Coming, 306.

Angel with the Gospel, 333.

Angels appear in last days, 223.

Anointing with Oil, 491.

Apostasy, 108, 176, 445.

Apostasy, Evidence of, 502.

Apostles and Prophets, 545.

Archaeological discoveries corroborating claims of Book of Mormon, 281.

Articles of Faith, How they came to be written, 20.

Atonement, The, 117, 314, 434.

Authority, 17, 107, 132, 143, 297, 395, 442, 480.

Baptism, 117, 293, 326, 373, 437, 474, 485, 520.

Baptism Changed, Mode of, 552.

Baptism essential to Salvation, 540.

Baptism for Dead commenced, 84.

Baptism for the Dead, 181, 439.

Baptism for the Dead done away with by "Josephites," 87.

Baptism, Infant, 113, 329.

Baptism, Mode of, 113, 326, 498, 525.

Baptism, Necessity of, 112, 133, 142.

Baptism, Purpose of, 327, 521.

Baptism, Subjects fit for, 522.

Baptismal ceremony, 489.

Belief alone not sufficient, 118, 423.

Believers, Signs follow the, 547.

Book of Mormon, 104, 140, 206, 239, 260, 446, 543, 562.

Book of Mormon's coming forth fulfills ancient prophecy, 210.

Book of Mormon, Discoveries in South America corroborate claims of, 544.

Book of Mormon gives test of its truth, 264.

Book of Mormon teaches, What the, 105, 209.

Book of Mormon, The coming forth of the, 207.

Book of Mormon published, 209.

Book of Mormon, What it is, 448.

Briggs, Jason W., Record of, 418.

But few will be lost, 67.

Christ's birthday, 567.

Christ, Blood of, 527.

Christ both God and man, 555-557.

Christ's Father immortal and mother mortal, 558.

Christ first born in spiritual creation, 558.

Christ only begotten in flesh of God, 558.

Christ's second coming, 126, 196, 304.

Christ spoken evil against in primitive days, 124.

Christ visits Western Hemisphere, 213.

Church founded upon Apostles and Prophets, 231.

Church, Growth of, 197, 453.

Church Organization, 259.

Church property seized, 456.

Church rejected with its dead, 87.

Comforter, The other, 338.

Corroborative Book of Mormon evidence by Non-Mormons, 268.

Creation, spiritual, 555.

Crusade against Mormons, 158.

Dead judged out of records, 90.

Dead Prophets accepted and living Prophets rejected, 168.

Death, Temporal, 555.

Death, The second, 557.

Dedication of Palestine, 36.

Degrees of Glory, 72, 185.

Disfranchisement, 160.

Disobedience, Penalty of, 315.

Doctrine of Christ, 486, 564.

Earth to be purified, 121.

Education among Mormons, 80, 152.

Effects of Holy Ghost upon Gentiles, 338.

Effects of Holy Ghost upon seed of Abraham, 338.

Effects of Mormonism, 78.

Efficacy of Christ's atoning blood, 316.

{ix} Election, 337.

Elements, Eternal, 12.

Elders' Attitude towards ministers, 226.

Elders' authority, 226.

Elders, Duties of, 10.

Elders rely upon Spirit of God, 227.

Elders, What, should preach, 15.

Eternal Life, How to gain, 11.

Eternal principles, 12.

Evangelist is a Patriarch, 339.

Evil feelings, Cherish no, 76.

Exodus of Saints to Rocky Mountains, 455.

Faith, 292, 321, 435, 464, 497.

Faith, How to get it, 299.

Faith in God and Jesus Christ necessary, 484.

Faith of Mormons their staff and comfort, 149.

Faith needed, 299.

Faith, Power of, 323.

Faith and Works necessary, 317, 359, 427, 508, 517.

Faith shown by works, 324.

Fall, Purpose of, 555.

Fall, The, 117, 555.

Family Organization, Celestial, 52.

Faults, Acknowledge your, 100.

First Principles, 106, 174, 242, 337.

First Principles necessary, 17.

Free Agency, 18, 562.

Fruits of the Gospel, 204.

Future destiny of the Work, 457.

Future existence, 165.

Gathering, The, 199, 248, 259.

Gifts of Holy Ghost, 106.

Gifts, Miraculous, 175.

Gifts, Necessity of Miraculous, 323.

Gifts, Spiritual, 444.

Gift of Tongues, Purpose of, 337.

God has a body, parts and passions, 127.

God, The Existence of a, 127.

God, Personality of, 347.

God's work everlasting, 18.

Godhead, Personality of the, 116, 236.

Godhead, The, 340, 432.

Gods, We believe in many, 128.

Gospel, All must obey the, 423.

Gospel of Jesus Christ includes all truth, 492.

Gospel, Liberality of the, 73.

Gospel Message, The, 457.

Gospel only accepted by a few, 14.

Gospel, Only one, 319, 501.

Gospel opens communication with Jehovah, 221.

Gospel plan a perfect one, 503.

Gospel plan comprehends more than this planet, 494.

Gospel preached to every soul, 66.

Gospel taught to Adam, 556.

Gospel taught to men on earth prior to Christ's advent, 495.

Gospel, The fulness of the everlasting, 431.

Governor Ford's statement, Comment on, 32.

Governor Ford's statement of the martyrdom, 29.

Government, Ecclesiastical, 110.

Graded Salvation and Damnation, 115, 185.

Gurley, Zenos H., Record of, 414.

Happiness for the sorrowful, 514.

Hardships and pioneer days, 149.

Heaven, 223.

History of Saints, 250.

Holy Ghost, 12, 242, 293, 381, 441, 478, 485.

Holy Ghost, Gift of, 489, 526.

Holy Spirit, Purpose of the, 295, 331.

How False and True teachers may be known, 294.

Importance of Message of Elders, 508.

Indian customs, rites, and traditions, 274.

Indians accept the Gospel, 217.

Indians all of one origin, 280.

Influence, A mother's, 535.

Intelligence, 12.

Jerusalem, Rebuilding of, 13.

Jesus Christ offers us Salvation, 291.

Jesus a stumbling stone, 234.

Johnson's Army, 456.

Josiah Quincy's statement, 3, 35.

Josiah Quincy's statement, Value of, 34.

Joseph Smith's claim, 236.

Joseph Smith on Doctrine, 337.

Joseph Smith's works proclaim him a Prophet, 260.

Judgments to come upon the world, 336.

Keys, All, bestowed upon the Twelve Apostles, 86, 461.

{x} Keys of work for Dead restored, 84, 190.

Knowledge, 11, 13.

Knowledge of God necessary to be saved, 423.

Knowledge of Gospel necessary to salvation, 300.

Knowledge, Man saved by gaining, 507.

Laying on of Hands, 330, 478.

Laying on of Hands in blessing sick, 489.

Laying on of Hands, Necessity of, 330.

Letters to a Baptist minister, 122.

Love of God, 16.

Love manifest by keeping commandments, 425.

Man, Origin of, 554.

Marks, William, History of, 408.

Marriage, 119.

Martin Harris shows ancient characters to learned man, 209.

Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, 198.

Material benefits derived from Mormonism, 81.

Men judged according to their obedience, 315, 433.

Mercy, 17.

Miracles, 243.

Missionary work, 137, 166, 199.

Missionary work among the Indians, 217.

Missionaries, Advice to, 228.

Morality among the Mormons, 119, 153.

Mormons accomplished much in 32 years, 150.

Mormons happy people, 80.

Mormons hold different claims to all other sects, 302.

Mormons into the Desert, 148.

Mormons like pilgrim fathers, 148.

Mormons, Loyalty of, 131.

Mormons own their own homes, 129.

Mormonism causes unity, 80.

Mormonism, Fruits of, 147, 204, 236.

Mormonism judged by its effects, 78.

Mormonism not a system of lust, 128.

Mormonism, Origin of and growth of, 145.

Murderer, No forgiveness for, 18.

Nauvoo, 25.

Obedience brings blessings, 16.

Obedience to laws of the land, 19.

Officers in Church, 132, 168, 171, 201, 296, 443.

Officers in the Church, Necessity of, 202, 297.

Ordinances, Essential, must be performed in Temples, 94.

Organization, 109, 176, 241, 296, 485.

Organization of the Church, 23, 201.

Persecution, 14, 23, 150, 156, 198, 235, 454.

Persecution, Missouri, 24.

Plates, Description of Book of Mormon, 22.

Plates given to the Prophet, 209.

Plates shown to the Prophet, 208.

Political Conditions, 161.

Power, Misuse of, 510.

Prediction of the Angel, 255.

Priesthood, 18.

Priesthood restored, 109, 198.

Preaching in spirit world, 560.

Preaching the Gospel, 79, 109.

Prophecies, Bible, fulfilled, 240.

Prophecies in Book of Mormon, 261.

Prophecies cannot be fulfilled without modern revelation, 233.

Prophecies concerning last days, 307.

Prophecies of the Prophet, 257.

Prophecy, 107.

Prophecy of Book of Mormon fulfilled, 216.

Prophecy of Civil War, 5, 19, 219, 257.

Prophecy of John the Revelator, 305.

Prophecy of Malachi, 253.

Prophecy that Saints would remove to Rocky Mountains, 32, 258.

Prophet, A congressman's opinion of the, 404.

Prophet preaches on work for Dead, 91.

Prophet, The, intended Hyrum to lead Church at his death, 461.

Prophets always stoned, 146.

Prophets announce all important events, 230.

Prophets in past ages, 234.

{xi} Prophet's assassination, 29.

Prophets needed, 200, 231.

Prophet's premonition of his death, 28.

Prophet's sermon on Salvation for Dead, 95.

Prophets should come indicated by God's word, 230.

Prophet's statement on translation of Book of Mormon, 18.

Prophets to be expected, 230.

Prophet's views on government, 6.

Prophet's work, Comment on, 27.

Punishment, Everlasting, 75, 115.

Punishment, Future, 121.

Religion, Characteristics of true, 59.

Religion, Only one perfect, 291.

Religious liberty, 135.

Re-organized Church, Claims of, 83.

Re-organization, Corner stone of, 408.

Repentance, 324, 366, 436, 471, 484, 498, 518.

Repentance, Death bed, 15.

Repentance, Necessity of, 325.

Restoration of Gospel, 65, 108, 125, 176, 196, 237, 451.

Resurrection, The, 40, 558.

Revelation, 206, 450.

Revelation, Necessary, 15, 18, 170.

Revelations, Chap. 14; 6-7 verses analyzed.

Roberts, B. H., case, 162.

Sacrament, Care in administering, 488.

Salvation, 16, 321.

Salvation for Dead, 69, 83, 93, 114, 179, 253, 531.

Salvation and Education, 320.

Salvation, Exclusive, 178, 503.

Salvation for Living and Dead, 59.

Salvation, Plan of, 16.

Salvation, Universal, 60, 313, 561.

Satan, Personal, 120.

Saved by grace through obedience, 313.

Signs of Christ's coming to appear, 305, 318.

Sincerity not conclusive evidence of truth, 63.

Spaulding Manuscript story, 124.

Spirit and Body, 17.

Spirit world, Work in the, 75.

Spirits, 10, 12.

Succession, 460.

Suggestions to Elders, 488.

Temples built, 85, 191.

Temples, Necessity of, 94.

Ten Commandments, The, 293.

Testimonies of people healed, 244.

Testimony of converts, 78.

Testimony of Prophet by disinterested men, 256.

Testimony proving Book of Mormon to be divine, 264.

Traditions of Indians show that they had a knowledge of God and the
Gospel, 286.

Truth, 12.

Unity in Church of Christ, 64.

Vicarious work, 189.

Virtuous, Seek to be, 16.

Vision, Prophet's first, 21, 207.

Visions, Other, of the prophet, 21, 197, 208, 238.

Witnesses of Book of Mormon, 213, 265, 448.

Words used in confirming persons members of Church, 490.

Work for the Dead, Importance of, 89.

Works, Necessary, 424.

World, Condition of people of the, 224.

Young, Brigham, accepted as President by vote of people, 462.

Young, Brigham, not ordained to office of President of Church, 460.

{1}

{2}

{3}



A STATEMENT FROM JOSIAH QUINCY, MAYOR OF BOSTON, 1845-1849, CONCERNING
AN INTERVIEW HAD IN 1844 WITH JOSEPH SMITH, THE MORMON PROPHET.

Some of the Sayings and Predictions Made by the Prophet Joseph Smith--A
Letter to Mr. Wentworth From the Prophet in Answer to a Request
From Him for a Statement of Belief, To Be Published in the Chicago
Democrat--The Prophet's Assassination; Extracts From Gov. Ford's
History of Illinois Concerning the Martyrdom, With Comments.

Compiled by Ben E. Rich.

Josiah Quincy, from whose "Figures of the Past" we quote, was born in
Boston in 1802. He was the Mayor of Boston from 1845 to 1849. He was
graduated from Harvard in 1821 and took his master's degree in 1824. He
died in 1882, soon after he wrote "Figures of the Past." The work was
taken from his diary and from letters written at the time of his visit
to Nauvoo.

"If the foretelling of future events that could not possibly have been
seen by human wisdom--events too, that from outward appearance were
very unlikely to come to pass; if the prediction of such events and
their subsequent fulfilment evidences a true prophet, then Joseph Smith
must have been a true prophet."

In 1844 Josiah Quincy visited the Prophet Joseph Smith at Nauvoo.
They conversed upon questions of government and the Prophet offered
a solution of the slavery question {4} which Josiah Quincy, in 1882,
declared the history of our country justified.

It is by no means impossible that some future textbook, for the use
of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something like
this: What historical American of the 19th century has exerted the
most powerful influence upon the destiny of his countrymen? It is by
no means impossible that the answer to that interrogatory may be thus
written: Joseph Smith, the Mormon prophet. And the reply, absurd as it
doubtless seems to most men now living, may be an obvious commonplace
to their descendants. History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite
as startling as this. A man who established a religion in this age of
free debate, who was, and is to-day, accepted by hundreds of thousands
as a direct emissary from the Most High, such a human being is not to
be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets. Fanatic,
impostor, charlatan, he may have been; but those hard names furnish
no solution to the problem he presents to us. Fanatics and impostors
are living and dying every day, and their memory is buried with them;
but the wonderful influence which this founder of religion exerted and
still exerts, throws him into relief before us, not as a rogue to be
criminated, but as a phenomenon to be explained. The vital questions
Americans are asking each other to-day have to do with this man and
with what he has left us. Is there any remedy heroic enough to meet
the case, yet in accordance with our national doctrines of liberty
and toleration, which can be applied to the doctrine now advanced by
the sect which he created? The possibilities of the Mormon system are
unfathomable. (Josiah Quincy, Figures of the Past.)

In 1855, when men's minds had been moved to their depths on the
question of slavery, Ralph Waldo Emerson declared that it should
be met with in accordance "with the interests of the South and the
settled conscience of the North. It is really not a great task, a great
fight for this country to accomplish, to buy that property of the
planter--the United States will be brought to give every inch of their
public lands for a purpose like this."

We who can look back upon the terrible cost of the fratricidal war
which put an end to slavery, now say that such a {5} solution of the
difficulty would have been very worthy of a Christian Statesman. But if
the retired scholar was in advance of his time when he advocated this
disposition of the public property in 1855, what shall I think of the
political and religious leader who had committed himself, in print, as
well as in conversation to the same course in 1844? If the atmosphere
of men's opinions was stirred by such a proposition when war clouds
were discernible in the sky, was it not a statesmanlike word eleven
years earlier when the heavens looked tranquil and beneficent? (Josiah
Quincy, F. of P.)

The Prophet also saw that war would devastate this land and prophesied
that "we shall soon have war and bloodshed;" that men shall hunt the
lives of their own sons; brothers kill brothers; mothers shall be
against daughters. He prophesied that this war should begin with the
rebellion of South Carolina, and that it should cause the death of many
souls; that the Southern States should be divided against the Northern
States, and that the Southern States should call upon other nations,
even Great Britain, to help them; that slaves should rise against their
masters and that they should be "marshaled and disciplined for war."
As late as 1882 Josiah Quincy marveled at the literal fulfilment of
this prophecy. He remarked the fact that Ralph Waldo Emerson proposed
the same solution of the slave question, in 1855, that the Prophet had
proposed eleven years earlier, in 1844. This prophecy on war was made
in 1832 by the Prophet and published to the world many years before his
conversation with Josiah Quincy. (Comment.)

Give every man his constitutional freedom and the President full
power to send an army to suppress mobs, and the States authority to
repeal and impugn that relic of folly which makes it necessary for the
Governor of the State to make the demand of the President for troops,
in case of invasion or rebellion.

Joseph Smith.

Josiah Quincy, Commenting on this Statement Said:

It is needless to remark how later events showed the executive weakness
that Mr. Smith pointed out--the weakness that cost thousands of
valuable lives and millions of treasure.

Born in the lowest ranks of poverty, without book-learning, and with
the homeliest of all human names, he had made {6} himself at the age
of thirty-nine a power upon the earth. Of the multitudinous family of
Smith, none had so won human hearts and shaped human lives as this
Joseph. His influence, whether for good or evil, is potent to-day, and
the end is not yet. If the reader does not know what to make of Joseph
Smith, I cannot help him out of the difficulty; I myself stand helpless
before the puzzle. (Josiah Quincy, F. of the P.)

I am a rough stone. The sound of the hammer and chisel were never heard
on me until the Lord took me in hand. I desire the learning and wisdom
of heaven alone.

(Joseph Smith.)

Some of His Views on Government.

The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is
a heavenly banner; it is like a great tree under whose branches men
from all climes can be shielded from the burning rays of an inclement
sun: and Mormon as well as Presbyterian, and every other denomination
have equal rights to partake of the fruits of this great tree of our
national Liberty.

Petition, also, ye goodly inhabitants of the slave States, your
legislators to abolish slavery by the year 1850, or now, and save the
abolitionist from reproach and ruin, infamy and shame. Pray Congress
to pay every man a reasonable price for his slaves out of the surplus
revenue arising from the sale of public lands.

Break off the shackles from the poor black man and hire him to labor
like other human beings: "For an hour of virtuous Liberty on earth is
worth a whole eternity of bondage."

For the accommodation of the people in every state and territory let
Congress show their wisdom by granting a national bank, with branches
in each state and territory, where the capital stock shall be held by
the nation for the mother bank and by the states and territories for
the branches, and {7} whose officers and directors shall be elected
by the people. The net gains of the mother bank should be applied
to the national revenue and that of the branches to the States' and
Territories' revenues.

When the people petition for a National Bank, I would use my best
endeavors to have their prayers answered, and establish one on national
principles to save taxes, and make them the controllers of its ways and
means.

Let the people of the whole Union, whenever they find a promise made by
the candidate that is not practiced as an officer, hurl the miserable
sycophant from his exaltation, as God did Nebuchadnezzar, to crop the
grass of the field with a beast's heart among the cattle.

Let the penitentiaries be turned into Seminaries of learning, where
intelligence, like the angels of heaven, would banish such fragments of
barbarism.

More economy in the National and State Government would make less
taxes among the people; and more honesty and familiarity in societies
would make less hypocrisy and flattery in all branches of the
community; and open, frank, candid decorum toward all men in this
boasted land of liberty would beget esteem, confidence, union and
love; and the neighbor from any state or any country, whatever color,
clime, or tongue, could rejoice when he put his foot on the sacred
soil of freedom and exclaim: "The very name of America is fraught
with friendship." Thus create confidence! Restore freedom! Break down
slavery! Banish imprisonment for debt, and be in love, fellowship and
peace with all the world! Remember that honesty is not subject to law;
the law is made for transgressors.

Were I the President of the United States, by the voice of a virtuous
people, I would honor the old paths of the {8} venerated fathers who
carried the ark of Government upon their shoulders with an eye single
to the glory of the people; and when that people petitioned to abolish
slavery in the slave states, I would use all honorable means to have
their prayers granted, and give liberty to the captive by paying the
Southern gentleman a reasonable equivalent for his property, that the
whole nation might be free indeed.

Rigor and seclusion will never do as much to reform the propensities of
man as reason and friendship.

When Egypt was under the superintendency of Joseph it prospered,
because he was taught of God; when they oppressed the Israelites,
destruction came upon them. When the children of Israel were chosen
with Moses at their head, they were to be a peculiar people, among whom
God should place His name; their motto was, "The Lord is our law-giver;
the Lord is our Judge; the Lord is our King, and He shall reign over
us." While in this state they might truly say, "Happy is that people,
whose God is the Lord." Their Government was a theocracy; they had God
to make their laws and men chosen by God to administer them; He was
their God, and they were His people. Moses received the Word of the
Lord from God himself; he was the mouth of God to Aaron, and Aaron
taught the people, in both civil and ecclesiastical affairs; they were
both one, there was no distinction; so it will be when the purposes
of God are accomplished; "when the Lord shall be King over the whole
earth, and Jerusalem His throne. The law shall go forth from Zion, and
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."

This is the only thing that can bring about the "restitution of all
things spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world was;" the
dispensation of the fullness of times, when God shall gather together
all things in one. Other attempts to promote universal peace and
happiness in the human family have proved abortive; every effort has
failed; every plan and design has fallen to the ground; it needs the
wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, the power of God to accomplish
this. The world has had a fair trial for six thousand years; the Lord
will try the seventh thousand, himself; "He whose right it is will
possess the Kingdom and reign until He has put all things under {9} His
feet; iniquity will hide its hoary head; Satan will be bound, and the
works of darkness destroyed; righteousness will be put to the line,
and judgment to the plummet, and 'He that fears the Lord will alone be
exalted in that day.'"

We do not believe it is just to mingle religious influence with civil
government, whereby one religious society is fostered and another
proscribed in its spiritual privileges, and the individual rights of
its members as citizens, denied.

We believe that no government can exist in peace except such laws are
framed and held inviolable as secured unto each individual the free
exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the
protection of life.

Meddle not with any man for his religion; for all government ought to
permit every man to enjoy his religion unmolested. No man is authorized
to take away life in consequence of difference of religion, which all
laws should govern and protect.

It has been the design of Jehovah from the commencement of the world,
and is His purpose now, to regulate the affairs of the world in His
own time, and to stand at the head of the universe, and take the reins
of government in His own hands. When that is done, judgment will be
administered in righteousness; anarchy and confusion will be destroyed,
and nations will learn war no more. It is for want of this great
governing principle that all this confusion has existed.

We believe that every man should be honored in his station; rulers and
magistrates, as such, being placed for the protection of the innocent,
and the punishment of the guilty; and that to the laws, all men owe
respect and deference, as without them peace and harmony would be
supplanted by anarchy and terror; human laws being instituted for the
express purpose of regulating our interests as individuals and nations,
{10} between man and man, and divine laws given of heaven, prescribing
rules on spiritual concerns, for faith and worship, both to be answered
by man to his Maker.

We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective
governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and
inalienable rights by the laws of such governments.

Miscellaneous Thought on Many Subjects.

Seek to know God in your closet; call upon Him in your field.

The sacrifice required of Abraham in the offering up of Isaac shows
that if a man would attain to the keys of the Kingdom of an endless
life, he must sacrifice all things. When God offers a blessing or
knowledge to man, and he refuses to receive it, he will be damned.

Spirits are eternal. At the first organization in heaven we were all
present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed, and the plan of
salvation made, and we sanctioned it.

When you climb a ladder, you must begin at the bottom and ascend step
by step until you arrive at the top; and so it is with the principles
of the Gospel; you must begin with the first and go along until you
have learned all the principles of exaltation.

It should be the duty of elders, when they enter into any house, to let
their labors and warning voice be to the master of that house; and if
he receives the Gospel, then he may extend his influence to his wife,
also, that peradventure she may receive the Gospel; but if the man
receive not the Gospel and give his consent that his wife may receive
it, then let her {11} receive it; but if the man forbid his wife, or
his children before they are of age, to receive the Gospel, then it
shall be the duty of the elder to go his way and use no influence
against him; and let the responsibility be upon his head.

There is never a time when the spirit is too old to approach God.

Knowledge saves a man, and in the world of spirits no man can be
exalted but by knowledge. So long as a man will not give heed to the
commands, he must abide without salvation.

Here, then, is eternal life--to know the only wise and true God; and
you have got to learn how to be gods yourselves, and to be kings and
priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by
going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a
great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until
you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell
in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit
enthroned in everlasting power.

When the Twelve, or any other witnesses, stand before the congregation
of the earth, and they preach in the power and demonstration of the
spirit of God, and the people are astonished and confounded at the
doctrine and say: That man has preached a powerful discourse, a great
sermon--then let that man or those men take care that they are humble
and ascribe the praise and glory to God and The Lamb; for it is by the
power of the Holy Priesthood and Holy Ghost that they have power thus
to speak. "What art thou, O man, but dust? And from whom dost thou
receive thy power and blessings but from God?"

If you wish to go where God is, you must be like God, or possess the
principles which God possesses, for if we are not drawing toward God
in principle, we are going from Him and drawing toward the devil. A
man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge, for if he does not get
knowledge, he will be {12} brought into captivity by some evil power.
It needs revelation to assist us, and give us knowledge of the things
of God.

Every principle proceeding from God is eternal and any principle which
is not eternal is of the devil. The sun has no beginning nor end;
the rays which proceed from himself have no bounds, consequently are
eternal. So it is with God. If the soul of man had a beginning it will
surely have an end. In the translation "without form and void" it
should read, empty and desolate. The word created should be, formed, or
organized.

Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither
indeed, can be.

All truth is knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as
they are to come.

All spirit is matter, but it is more fine and pure.

Ye were also in the beginning with the Father.

We have no claim in our eternal compact, in relation to eternal things,
unless our actions and contracts and all things tend to this end.

The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably
connected, receiveth a fullness of joy, and when separated, man cannot
receive a fullness of joy.

The first Comforter, or Holy Ghost, has no other effect than pure
intelligence. It is powerful in expanding the mind, {13} enlightening
the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge.

Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and
water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea
be healed. It will take some time to build the walls of the city and
the temple, etc.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will
make His appearance. There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in
the heaven above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness
and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving
beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man
in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a
comet, etc.

He that receiveth light and continueth in God, receiveth more light,
and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day.

Study and learn and become acquainted with all good books, and with
languages, tongues and people, for it is impossible for a man to be
saved in ignorance.

"We have turned the barren, bleak prairies and swamps into beautiful
towns, farms and cities, by our industry; and the men who seek our
destruction and cry thief, treason, riot, are those who themselves
violate the laws, steal and plunder from their neighbors, and seek
to destroy the innocent, heralding forth lies to screen themselves
from the just punishment of their crimes by bringing destruction upon
innocent people."

If a people, a community, or a society, can accumulate wealth, increase
a worldly fortune, improve in science and arts, rise to eminence in the
eyes of the public, surmount difficulties so much as to bid defiance to
poverty and wretchedness, it must be a new creation, a race of beings
superhuman. But in all {14} our poverty and want, we have yet to learn
for the first time, that we are not industrious and temperate, and
wherein we have not always been the last to retaliate or resent an
injury, and the first to overlook and forgive.

"We have been driven time after time, and that without cause; and
smitten again and again, and that without provocation; until we have
proved the world with kindness, and the world has proved us, that we
have no designs against any man or set of men; that we injure no man;
that we are peaceable with all men, minding our own business, and our
business only. We have suffered our rights and our liberties to be
taken from us; we have not avenged ourselves for those wrongs; we have
appealed to magistrates, to sheriffs, to judges, to the Government
and to the President of the United States--all in vain; yet we have
yielded peacefully to all these things. We have not complained at the
Great God; we murmured not, but peacefully left all, and retired into
the back country, in the broad and wild prairies, in the barren and
desolate plains, and there commenced anew; making the desolate places
to bud and blossom as the rose."

Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may
not see the reason thereof until long after the events transpired.

"Time and experience will teach us more and more how easily falsehood
gains credence with mankind in general, rather than the truth; but
especially in taking into consideration the plan of salvation. The
plain simple truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ never has been
discerned nor acknowledged as the truth, except by a few--among whom
were 'not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble;' whilst the majority have contented themselves with their own
private opinions, or have adopted those of others, according to their
address, their philosophy, their formula, their policy, or their
fitness may have attracted their attention or pleased their taste. But,
sir, of all the criterions whereby we may judge of the vanity of these
things, one will always be found true, namely, that we will always find
such characters glorifying in their own wisdom and their own works;
whilst the humble saint gives all the glory to God the Father, and to
His Son Jesus Christ, {15} whose yoke is easy, and whose burden is
light, and who told His Disciples that unless they became as little
children, they could not enter the Kingdom of Heaven."

"We consider that when a man scandalizes his neighbor, it follows, of
course, that he designs to cover his own iniquity; we consider him who
puts his foot upon the neck of his benefactor an object of pity rather
than revenge, for in so doing he not only shows the contraction of his
own mind, but the wickedness of his heart also."

"The infidel will grasp at every straw for help until death stares
him in the face, and then his infidelity takes its flight, for the
realities of the eternal world are resting upon him in mighty power;
and when every earthly support and prop fails him, he then sensibly
feels the eternal truths of the immortality of the soul. We should heed
warning and not wait for the death-bed to repent. As we see the infant
taken away by death, so may the youth and middle-aged, as well as the
infant, be called into eternity. Let this, then, prove as a warning to
all, not to procrastinate repentance, or wait until upon the death-bed,
for it is the will of God that man should repent and serve Him in
health and in the strength and power of his mind, in order to secure
His blessings, and not wait until he is called to die."

The time has come that elders should go forth, and each must stand for
himself in all meekness, in sobriety, and preach Jesus Christ and Him
crucified; not to contend with others on account of their faith, or
systems of religion, but pursue a steady course.

Salvation comes not without a revelation; it is in vain for anyone to
minister without it. No man is a minister of Jesus Christ without being
a prophet. No man can be a minister of Jesus Christ except he has the
testimony of Jesus; and this is the Spirit of Prophecy.

It is for us to be righteous, that we may be wise and {16} understand,
for none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand,
and they that turn man to righteousness shall shine as the stars for
ever and ever.

There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundation of
this world, upon which all blessings are predicted; and when we obtain
a blessing from God, it is by obedience to the law upon which it is
predicted.

Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to be
manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God. A man filled with
the love of God is not content with blessing his family alone, but
ranges through the whole world anxious to bless the whole human race.

Salvation means a man's being placed beyond the power of all his
enemies.

Be virtuous and pure; be men of integrity and truth; keep the
Commandments of God and then you will be able to understand the
difference between right and wrong--between the things of God and the
things of man; and your path will be like that of the just, which
shineth brighter and brighter unto the perfect day.

The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with
the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into
existence, or before the morning stars sang for joy; the past, the
present, the future were, and are, with Him one eternal "now."

There are three independent principles: The Spirit of God; the Spirit
of Man, and the Spirit of the Devil. All men have power to resist the
devil.

In tracing the thing to the foundation, and looking at it {17}
philosophically, we shall find a very material difference between the
body and the spirit; the body is supposed to be organized matter, and
the spirit, by many, is thought to be immaterial, without substance.
With this latter statement we should beg leave to differ, and state
that the spirit is a substance; that it is material, but that it is
more pure, elastic, and refined matter than the body; that it existed
before the body, and will exist separate from the body, when the body
will be mouldering in the dust; and will in the Resurrection be again
united with it.

Ever keep in exercise the principle of mercy, and be ready to forgive
our brother on the first intimations of repentance, and asking
forgiveness; and should we even forgive our brother, or even our enemy,
before they repent or ask forgiveness, our Heavenly Father would be
equally as merciful unto us.

If God has established His authority, and His divine will is made known
through that authority to the Church, and any member refuses to receive
it, he cuts himself off from the Church; from the benefits of the Holy
Priesthood, and from the fellowship and favor of God, and becomes a
castaway.

To be a Latter-day Saint requires sacrifice of worldly aims and
pleasures; requires fidelity, strength of character, love of truth,
integrity to principle and zealous desire to see the triumphant march
of truth.

All men who become heirs of God and joint heirs of Jesus Christ will
have to receive the fullness of the ordinances of His Kingdom; and
those who will not receive all the ordinances will come short of the
fullness of that glory, if they do not lose the whole.

There is no other way beneath the heaven that God hath ordained for man
to come to Him, except through faith in Jesus Christ, repentance and
baptism for the remission of sins; {18} then follows the promise of the
gift of the Holy Ghost. Any other course is in vain.

Where there is no change of priesthood, there is no change of
ordinances, says Paul. If God has not changed the priesthood and the
ordinances, howl, ye sectarians! If He has, when and where has He
revealed it? Have ye turned revelators? Why then deny revelation?

How consoling to the mourners, when they are called to part with a
husband, wife, or father, mother, child or dear relative, to know that
although the earthly tabernacle is laid down and dissolved, they shall
rise again to dwell in everlasting burnings in immortal glory, not to
sorrow, suffer or die any more; but they shall be heirs of God and
joint heirs with Jesus Christ.

By the power of God I translated the Book of Mormon from hieroglyphics,
the knowledge of which was lost to the world; in which wonderful event
I stood alone, an unlearned youth, to combat with the worldly wisdom
and multiplied ignorance of eighteen centuries, with a new revelation,
which--if they would receive the everlasting gospel--would open the
ears of more than eight hundred millions of people and make "plain
the old paths," where if a man walk in all the ordinances of God,
blameless, he should inherit eternal life.

If the ministers of religion had a proper understanding of the
doctrines of eternal judgment, they would not be found attending
the man who had forfeited his life, and injured the laws of the
country by shedding innocent blood, for such characters cannot be
forgiven until they have paid the last farthing; the prayers of all
the ministers in the world cannot close the gates of hell against a
murderer--unconditional election to eternal life was not taught by the
apostles.

No unhallowed hand can stop the work of God from {19} progressing.
Persecution may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny
may defame; but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly and
independently, until it has penetrated every continent and visited
every clime, swept over the country and sounded in every ear till the
purposes of God shall be accomplished and the great Jehovah shall say
the work is done.

We cannot be perfect without the fathers. We must have revelations from
them, and we can see that the doctrine of revelation as far transcends
the doctrine of no revelation as knowledge is above ignorance; for
one truth revealed from heaven is worth all the sectarian notions in
existence.

We believe that religion is instituted of God, and that men are
answerable to Him, and Him only, for the exercise of it unless their
religious opinions brought them to infringe upon the rights and
liberties of others; but we do not believe that human law has the right
to interfere in prescribing rules of worship to bind the consciences of
men, nor dictate forms for public or private devotion; that the civil
magistrate should restrain crime, but never control conscience; should
punish guilt, but never suppress the freedom of a soul.

We have ever held ourselves amenable to the law; and for myself I
am ever ready to conform to and support the laws and Constitution,
even at the expense of my life. I have never in the least offered any
resistance to the law or lawful process, which is a well-known fact to
the public.

Posterity will yet do us the justice, when our persecutors are equally
low in the dust with ourselves, to hand down to succeeding generations
the virtuous acts and forbearance of a people who sacrificed their
reputations for their religion and their earthly fortunes and happiness
to preserve peace.

"Men profess to prophesy. I will prophesy that the signs {20} of the
coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. We shall soon have war
and bloodshed."

"As for perils which I am called to pass through, they seem but a small
thing to me, as the envy and wrath of men have been my common lot all
the days of my life; and for what cause it seems mysterious, unless I
was ordained before the foundation of the world for some good end, or
bad, as you may choose to call it."

At the request of Mr. John Wentworth, editor and proprietor of the
Chicago _Democrat_, the Prophet wrote the following statement. Mr.
Wentworth requested a statement of the faith of the Saints for the use
of a Mr. Bostow, who was writing a history of New Hampshire.

I was born in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, on the 23rd
day of December, A. D. 1805. When ten years old my parents removed to
Palmyra, New York, where we resided about four years, and from thence
we removed to the town of Manchester. My father was a farmer and taught
me the art of husbandry. When about fourteen years of age, I began to
reflect upon the importance of being prepared for a future state, and
upon inquiring the plan of salvation, I found that there was a great
clash in religious sentiment; if I went to one society they referred
me to one plan, and another to another; each one pointing to his own
particular creed as the _summum bonum_ of perfection; considering
that all could not be right, and that God could not be the author
of so much confusion, I determined to investigate the subject more
fully, believing that if God had a Church it would not be split up
into factions, and that if He taught one society to worship one way,
and administer in one set of ordinances, He would not teach another,
principles which were diametrically opposed.

Believing the word of God, I had confidence in the declaration of
James--"If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth to all
men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him." I retired
to a secret place in a grove, and began to call upon the Lord; while
fervently engaged in supplication, my mind was taken away from the
objects with which I was surrounded, and I was enwrapped in a heavenly
{21} vision, and saw two glorious personages, who exactly resembled
each other in features and likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light
which eclipsed the sun at noon day. They told me that all religious
denominations were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of
them were acknowledged of God as His Church and Kingdom: and I was
expressly commanded "to go not after them," at the same time receiving
a promise that the fulness of the Gospel should at some future time be
made known unto me.

On the evening of the 21st of September, A. D. 1823, while I was
praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious
promises of Scripture, of a sudden a light like that of day, only of
a far purer and more glorious appearance and brightness, burst into
the room, indeed the first sight was as though the house was filled
with consuming fire; the appearance produced a shock that affected the
whole body; in a moment a personage stood before me surrounded with a
glory yet greater than that with which I was already surrounded. This
messenger proclaimed himself to be an angel of God, sent to bring the
joyful tidings that the covenant which God made with ancient Israel
was at hand to be fulfilled, that the preparatory work for the second
coming of the Messiah was speedily to commence; that the time was at
hand for the Gospel in all its fulness to be preached in power, unto
all nations that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign. I
was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God
to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious dispensation.

I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of this
country and shown who they were, and from whence they came; a brief
sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws, governments,
of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings of God being
finally withdrawn from them as a people, was made known unto me; I was
also told where were deposited some plates on which were engraven an
abridgment of the records of the ancient Prophets that had existed on
this continent. The angel appeared to me three times the same night and
unfolded the same things. After having received many visits from the
angels of God unfolding the majesty and glory of the events that should
transpire in the last days, on the morning of the 22nd of September, A.
D. 1827, the angel of the Lord delivered the records into my hands.

These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of
gold, each plate was six inches wide and eight {22} inches long, and
not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings,
in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the leaves
of a book, with three rings running through the whole. The volume was
something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The
characters on the unsealed part were small, and beautifully engraved.
The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction,
and much skill in the art of engraving. With the records was found a
curious instrument, which the ancients called "Urim and Thummim," which
consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to
a breast plate. Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim I translated
the record by the gift and power of God.

In this important and interesting book the history of ancient America
is unfolded, from its first settlement by a colony that came from the
Tower of Babel, at the confusion of languages to the beginning of the
fifth century of the Christian Era. We are informed by these records
that America in ancient times had been inhabited by two distinct races
of people. The first were called Jaredites, and came directly from
the Tower of Babel. The second race came directly from the city of
Jerusalem, about six hundred years before Christ. They were principally
Israelites, of the descendants of Joseph. The Jaredites were destroyed
about the time that the Israelites came from Jerusalem, who succeeded
them in the inheritance of the country. The principal nation of the
second race fell in battle toward the close of the fourth century.
The remnant are the Indians that now inhabit this country. This book
also tells us that our Savior made His appearance upon this continent
after His resurrection; that He planted the Gospel here in all its
fulness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that they had Apostles,
Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, and Evangelists; the same order, the same
Priesthood, the same ordinances, gifts, powers, and blessings, as were
enjoyed on the eastern continent, that the people were cut off in
consequence of their transgressions, that the last of their Prophets
who existed among them was commanded to write an abridgment of their
prophecies, history, etc., and to hide it up in the earth, and that it
should come forth and be united with the Bible for the accomplishment
of the purposes of God in the last days. For a more particular account
I would refer to the Book of Mormon, which can be purchased at Nauvoo,
or from any of our Traveling Elders.

As soon as the news of this discovery was made known, {23} false
reports, misrepresentation and slander flew, as on the wings of the
wind, in every direction; the house was frequently beset by mobs and
evil designing persons. Several times I was shot at, and very narrowly
escaped, and every device was made use of to get the plates away from
me; but the power and blessing of God attended me, and several began to
believe my testimony.

On the 6th of April, 1830, the "Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints" was first organized in the town of Fayette, Seneca County,
State of New York. Some few were called and ordained by the Spirit of
revelation and prophecy, and began to preach as the Spirit gave them
utterance, and though weak, yet were they strengthened by the power of
God, and many were brought to repentance, were immersed in the water,
and were filled with the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. They
saw visions and prophesied, devils were cast out, and the sick healed
by the laying on of hands. From that time the work rolled forth with
astonishing rapidity, and Churches were soon formed in the States of
New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Missouri; in
the last named State a considerable settlement was formed in Jackson
County: numbers joined the Church and we were increasing rapidly; we
made large purchases of land, our farms teemed with plenty, and peace
and happiness were enjoyed in our domestic circle, and throughout
our neighborhood; but we could not associate with our neighbors who
were, many of them, of the basest of men, and had fled from the face
of civilized society, to the frontier country to escape the hand of
justice, in their midnight revels, their Sabbath breaking, horse racing
and gambling; they commenced at first to ridicule, then to persecute,
and finally an organized mob assembled and burned our houses, tarred
and feathered and whipped many of our brethren, and finally drove them
from their habitations; who, houseless and homeless, contrary to law,
justice, and humanity, had to wander on the bleak prairies till the
children left the tracks of their blood on the prairie; this took place
in the month of November, and they had no other covering but the canopy
of heaven, in this inclement season of the year; this proceeding was
winked at by the government, and although we had warranty deeds for our
land, and had violated no law, we could obtain no redress.

There were many sick, who were thus inhumanly driven from their houses,
and had to endure all this abuse and to seek homes where they could
be found. The result was, that a great many of them being deprived of
the comforts of life, {24} and the necessary attendances, died, many
children were left orphans; wives, widows; and husbands, widowers; our
farms were taken possession of by the mob, many thousands of cattle,
sheep, horses and hogs were taken, and our household goods, store
goods, and printing press and type were broken, taken, or otherwise
destroyed.

Many of our brethren removed to Clay, where they continued until 1836,
three years; there was no violence offered, but there were threatenings
of violence. But in the summer of 1836 these threatenings began to
assume a more serious form; from threats, public meetings were called,
resolutions were passed, vengeance and destruction were threatened,
and affairs again assumed a fearful attitude, Jackson County was
a sufficient precedent, and as the authorities in that county did
not interfere, they boasted that they would not in this: which on
application to the authorities we found to be too true, and after much
violence, privation, and loss of property we were again driven from our
homes.

We next settled in Caldwell and Davies Counties, where we made large
and extensive settlements, thinking to free ourselves from the power
of oppression, by settling in new counties, with very few inhabitants
in them; but here we were not allowed to live in peace, but in 1838
we were again attacked by mobs, an exterminating order was issued by
Governor Boggs, and under the sanction of law, an organized banditti
ranged through the country, robbed us of our cattle, sheep, horses,
hogs, etc., many of our people were murdered in cold blood, the
chastity of our women was violated, and we were forced to sign away our
property at the point of the sword; and after enduring every indignity
that could be heaped upon us by an inhuman, ungodly band of marauders,
from twelve to fifteen thousand souls, men, women and children were
driven from their own firesides, and from lands that they had warranty
deeds of, houseless, friendless, and homeless (in the depths of winter)
to wander as exiles on the earth, or to seek an asylum in a more genial
clime, and among a less barbarous people. Many sickened and died in
consequence of the cold and hardships they had to endure; many wives
were left widows, and children orphans, and destitute. It would take
more time than is allotted me here to describe the injustice, the
wrongs, the murders, the bloodshed, the theft, misery and woe that has
been caused by the barbarous, inhuman, and lawless proceedings of the
State of Missouri.

In the situation before alluded to, we arrived in the State of Illinois
in 1839, where we found a hospitable people and {25} a friendly home;
a people who were willing to be governed by the principles of law and
humanity. We have commenced to build a city called "Nauvoo," in Hancock
County. We number from six to eight thousand here, besides vast numbers
in the county around, and in almost every county of the State. We
have a City Charter granted us, and charter for a Legion, the troops
of which now number 1,500. We have also a charter for a University,
for an Agricultural and Manufacturing Society, have our own laws and
administrators, and possess all the privileges that other free and
enlightened citizens enjoy.

Persecution has not stopped the progress of truth, but has only added
fuel to the flame, it has spread with increasing rapidity; proud of
the cause which they have espoused, and conscious of their innocence,
and of the truth of their system, amidst calumny and reproach, have
the Elders of this Church gone forth, and planted the Gospel in almost
every State in the Union; it has penetrated our cities, it has spread
over our villages, and has caused thousands of our intelligent, noble,
and patriotic citizens to obey its divine mandates, and be governed by
its sacred truths. It has also spread into England, Ireland, Scotland
and Wales; in the year of 1840, where a few of our missionaries were
sent, over five thousand joined the Standard of Truth; there are
numbers now joining in every land.

Our missionaries are going forth to different nations, and in Germany,
Palestine, New Holland, the East Indies, and other places, the Standard
of Truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from
progressing, persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may
assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth
boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent,
visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear,
till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah
shall say the work is done.

1. We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ,
and in the Holy Ghost.

2. We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for
Adam's transgression.

3. We believe that, through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may be
saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel.

{26} 4. We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the
Gospel are: First, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance;
third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying
on of Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

5. We believe that a man must be called of God, by "prophecy, and by
the laying on of hands" by those who are in authority, to preach the
Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

6. We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive
church--namely: Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Evangelists, etc.

7. We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions,
healing, interpretation of tongues, etc.

8. We believe the Bible to be the Word of God as far as it is
translated correctly; we also believe the book of Mormon to be the Word
of God.

9. We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal,
and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

10. We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the
restoration of the ten tribes; that Zion will be built upon this (the
American) continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth,
and that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory.

11. We claim the privilege of worshipping Almighty God according to the
dictates of our conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let
them worship how, where, or what they may.

12. We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and
magistrates in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law.

13. We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous,
and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the
admonition of Paul. "We believe all things, we hope all things," we
have endured many things, we hope to be able to endure all things. If
there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy,
we seek after these things.

Joseph Smith.

Comment.

{27} What a stupendous work has been accomplished through his
instrumentality! And what an immeasurable benefit has it been to that
part of the human family which has laid hold of the blessings offered!
His active service in the work, though limited to but fifteen years,
when he gave his life a sacrifice for Truth, has made his name known
throughout the entire civilized world; and as the angel told him, it
is known for good and evil. Those whose prejudices, fed on popular
denunciations and accusations which have their origin in untruthful
breasts of wicked and depraved men, have kept them under the clouds of
ignorance and misunderstanding regarding him and his mission, hold his
name in disrepute; while those who have heeded not the libelous and
slanderous cries of his enemies, but have probed to the root of the
truth in the matter, and consequently understood him as he was and his
mission as it actually is, hold his name in honor, whether they have
obeyed the Gospel or not; but those who revere his memory most, hold it
sacred before men, and thank God for his noble life and his faithful
work, are those who have heard and obeyed the Gospel of Jesus Christ as
it was restored to the earth through Him, and during their whole lives
have lived righteously before the Lord, true and steadfast to every
covenant they have made with Him.

In reviewing the results of his labors effected by the aid of God's
power manifested in him, as we see them today in the perfected Church
of Christ, its influence upon the world, the achievements of those who
have embraced the truth, and the favorable condition of the saints
generally, certainly of the literal fulfilment of the prediction of the
prophet of old that in the last day God would establish a marvelous
work and a wonder, forces itself clearly upon our minds. And in view of
all that has been accomplished through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and
the far-reaching effects of his labors, even his bitterest enemies and
those who most vigorously combat the system God established through
him, are forced to a realization of the truth of Josiah Quincy's
contention that of all Americans in the nineteenth century, none among
them have exerted so great an influence upon "the destinies of their
countrymen" as has "Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet!" and to-day more
than ever before, should the world appreciate the value of Mr. Quincy's
declaration concerning him, that "such a human being is not to be
disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory epithets." His life
was devoted to {28} the cause of humanity, according as God directed
him; and although the world will not acknowledge it, nevertheless there
are nearly half a million earnest, sincere and honest-hearted men and
women who know he was a prophet of the most high God, and that which he
declared to the world under the spirit of the Almighty is the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, with its gifts, its blessings, and its powers restored
for the salvation and exaltation of man. Thank God for the noble life
and the faithful labors of his humble and obedient servant, Joseph
Smith! (Elders Journal, Vol. 4, pages 146-7.)

"Those who have not been enclosed within the walls of prison without
cause or provocation, can have but little idea how sweet the voice
of a friend is! One token of friendship from any source whatever,
awakens and calls into action every sympathetic feeling; it brings
up in an instant everything that is past; it seizes the present
with the avidity of lightening; it grasps after the future with the
fierceness of a tiger; it moves the mind backward and forward, from one
thing to another, until finally all enmity, malice, hatred, and past
differences, misunderstandings and mismanagements, are slain victorious
at the feet of hope."

Joseph Smith, claiming to be an inspired teacher, faced adversity
such as few men have been called to meet, enjoyed a brief season of
prosperity such as few men have ever attained, and finally, forty-three
days after I saw him, went cheerfully to a martyr's death. When he
surrendered his person to Governor Ford in order to prevent the
shedding of innocent blood, the Prophet had a premonition of what was
before him. (Josiah Quincy in Figures of the Past.)

Premonitions of Death.

When at the hotel at Carthage, a prisoner in the hands of mob
officials, he asked if he looked like a desperate character. They
replied that his outward appearance seemed to indicate exactly the
opposite, but they could not tell what was in his heart. "Very true,
gentlemen, you cannot see what is in my heart, and you are therefore
unable to judge my intentions, {29} but I see what is in your hearts,
and I will tell you what I see. I can see that you thirst for blood
and nothing but my blood will satisfy you. It is not for crime of any
description that I and my brethren are continually persecuted and
harassed by our enemies, but there are other motives, and some of them
I have expressed so far as relates to myself. I prophesy in the name
of the Lord that you shall witness scenes of blood and sorrow to your
entire satisfaction. Many of you who are now present shall have an
opportunity to face the cannon's mouth from sources you think not of."

"If they take my life, I shall die an innocent man, and my blood shall
cry from the ground for vengeance, and it shall yet be said of him, 'He
was murdered in cold blood.'"

"I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer
morning. I have a conscience void of offence toward God and toward all
men."

His Assassination.

A statement from Thomas Ford, Governor of Illinois in 1844:

I desire to make a brief but true statement of the recent disgraceful
affair at Carthage, in regard to the Smiths, so far as circumstances
have come to my knowledge. The Smiths, Joseph and Hyrum, have been
assassinated in jail, by whom is not known. I pledged myself for their
safety, and upon the assurance of that pledge they surrendered as
prisoners. . . . The compliance of the Mormons with every requisition
made upon them, failed of their purpose. The pledge of security to
the Smiths was not given upon my individual responsibility. Before I
gave it, I obtained a pledge of honor by a unanimous vote from the
officers and men under my command, to sustain me in performing it. If
the assassination of the Smiths was committed by any portion of them,
they have added treachery to murder, and have done all they could to
disgrace the State, and sully the public honor.

On the morning of the day the deed was committed, we had proposed
to march the army under my command into {30} Nauvoo. I, however,
discovered, on the evening before, that nothing but utter destruction
of the city would satisfy a portion of the troops; and that if we
marched into the city, pretext would not be wanting for commencing
hostilities. The Mormons had done everything required, or that ought to
have been required of them. For these reasons, I decided, in a council
of officers, to disband the army, except three companies, two of which
were retained as guards for the jail. With the other company I marched
into Nauvoo, to address the inhabitants there. . . . I performed this
duty, and then set out to return to Carthage. When I had marched about
three miles, a messenger informed me of the occurrences at Carthage.

  (Signed) Thomas Ford,
  _Governor and Commander-in-Chief_.

Governor Ford, in his History of Illinois, admits that he pledged
Joseph Smith, and fourteen others for whose arrests warrants had
been issued, the protection of the State if they would leave Nauvoo
and go to Carthage for trial upon the charge of treason. Acting upon
this pledge, they left Nauvoo, a city of 16,000 Saints who had armed
themselves against mob violence, and went to Carthage. Here they
were met by Governor Ford and the State militia. At the dictation of
a Justice of Peace, who vastly exceeded his legal authority, they
were taken from the hotel and placed in Carthage jail. Again the
Governor pledged them protection. He planned to go to Nauvoo with the
entire force under his command, but found that the men under him were
anxious to go to Nauvoo to exterminate the Saints and he determined
to discharge the militia, except three companies. In the morning of
the day of the assassination he started for Nauvoo with two of these
companies, leaving the third (the Carthage Grays) to guard the jail. Of
this company the Governor said:

"I knew that this company were the enemies of the Smiths, yet I had
confidence in their loyalty and integrity, because their captain was
universally spoken of as a most respectable citizen and honorable man."
Yet the Governor knew that in his presence and upon the arrival of the
Prophet these same men had rebelled against their captain.

Before reaching Nauvoo, rumors of the intended assassination came to
him in such numbers that he determined to send one of the companies
with him back to Carthage, but they did not reach the city as an
organized body. At Carthage, {31} preparations were being made on
every hand for the assassination. The captain of the Carthage Grays
left his company for fear of his life and, quoting again from Governor
Ford's History of Illinois: "Communication was established between the
conspirators and the company who were stationed some distance from the
jail, and it was arranged that the eight men on guard should have their
guns charged with blank cartridges, and fire at the assailants when
they attempted to enter the jail." In the afternoon, and while Governor
Ford was addressing the Saints in Nauvoo upon law and order, a mob of
bloodthirsty men, with faces blackened and consciences stilled, charged
the jail and assassinated the Prophet Joseph Smith and Patriarch Hyrum
Smith, his brother. They were in an upper room of the jail accompanied
by Apostles John Taylor and Willard Richards. Each fell wounded with
four balls and Apostle Taylor was also four times wounded. The Prophet
fell from the window and a ruffian placed his body against the well
curbing, where four men at a distance of a few paces fired upon his
prostrate body.

The Christian world has hitherto regarded the growth of Mormonism with
a kind of an air of indifference, but, unfortunately, they may yet
awaken to feel its power. It is not at all improbable that within the
course of a century some great orator may arise, some man gifted like
the Apostle Paul, who will make the name of the martyr prophet ring
even as does the name of Christ, and it is not impossible that Sharon,
Palmira, Manchester, Kirtland, Far West, Adam-on-Diahmon, Ramus,
Nauvoo, and the Carthage Jail may become holy and venerable names,
places of classic interest, in another age, like Jerusalem, the Garden
of Gethsemane, the Mount of Olives and Mount Calvary to the Christian,
and Mecca and Medina to the Turk. And in that event the author of this
history feels degraded by the reflection that the humble Governor of an
obscure State, who would otherwise be forgotten in a few years, stands
a fair chance, like Pilate and Herod, by their official connection
with the true religion, of being dragged down to posterity with an
immortal name, hitched on to the memory of a miserable impostor. There
may be those whose ambitions would lead them to desire an immortal name
in history, even in those humbling terms. I am not of that number.
(Governor Ford's History of Illinois.)

{32} Yes, Governor Ford, you are of that number, your name does go
down through the generations of time, righteously coupled with that of
Pontius Pilate, caused by your official connection with the death of a
true Prophet of God. Your treachery, in plighting to him the protection
of the State of Illinois, and then leaving him in the hands of
confederate murderers, preserves your name in history, only to be hated
and despised by those who abhor the existence of treachery. Joseph
Smith relied upon your solemn pledge as the Governor of a great State,
that he should be protected. He was basely betrayed, together with his
beloved brother Hyrum, and went to a martyr's grave. His name is held
throughout every civilized nation upon the earth as a Prophet, Seer
and Revelator, while you became an object of charity, and now occupy
a pauper's grave, having been buried as a public charge. It is not
often that a man occupying the exalted position of Governor, lives to
see himself despised, and fed by the hand of charity; but God gave you
this fate, and during the last moments of your miserable life you must
have had a strong testimony that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God.
"Mormonism is now so firmly established that it claims the respectful
attention of the world. It has survived not only the violence which
murdered its Prophets, burned the houses of Saints, laid waste the
fields and destroyed their temples, but also an exodus which, for the
distance covered and the dangers encountered, has not a parallel in
ancient or modern history."

Nearly every nation under the whole heaven has given to the new faith
some of her sons and daughters. What the Christian church is to the
world to-day in point of numbers of followers and kindliness of
feeling, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will be to
future generations. Its destiny is to roll until it shall fill the
whole earth: It had its beginning when God spoke to Joseph Smith out of
the heavens and He will finish what He has begun.

Another Prophecy.

August 6, 1842.

"I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction,
and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, and many would apostatize,
others would be put to death by our persecutors, or lose their lives
in consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go
and assist in {33} making settlements and building cities and see the
Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains."

How literally this prophecy has been fulfilled! To-day the church
numbers hundreds of thousands of prosperous, happy people in the midst
of several Rocky Mountain States. Millions of dollars have been spent
in establishing and maintaining schools: millions in the erection of
churches, Tabernacles and Temples. Through the most wonderful system
of irrigation in the world, the desert has been made to produce in
abundance; the waste places have become fruitful, and the wilderness
made to "blossom as the rose." To-day the colonizer is asking the
secret of the system that has made it possible to establish thousands
of peaceful towns and cities in those mountain valleys, and he will not
understand that the voice of revelation established this western empire
and that the Spirit of God preserves its unity.

Brigham Young, Successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"To accuse us of being unfriendly to the government is to accuse us
of hostility to our religion, for no item of inspiration is held more
sacred with us than the Constitution under which she acts."

John Taylor, Second Successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"It was through and by the power of God, that the fathers of this
country framed the Declaration of Independence, and also that great
palladium of human rights, the Constitution of the United States.
There is nothing of a bigoted, narrow-contracted feeling about that
instrument; it is broad and comprehensive."

Wilford Woodruff, Third Successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"The Lord inspired the men who framed the Constitution of our country,
and has guarded the nation from its foundation."

{34}

Lorenzo Snow, Fourth Successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

"The spirits dwelling within our bodies are immortal and will always
exist. Our individuality and our identity will always continue; we will
be ourselves and will continue advancing in wisdom, intelligence and
power worlds without end."

Joseph F. Smith, Fifth Successor to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

It was part of the design of the Almighty when He influenced the
fathers to leave the old world and come to this continent; He had a
hand in the establishment of this government; He inspired the framers
of the Constitution and the fathers of this nation to contend for their
liberty.

When we remember that Mr. Quincy had the rare opportunity of being
personally and intimately acquainted with the great men of America,
of his period; that he was acquainted with Lafayette, and that John
Quincy Adams, the Second President of the U. S., was his personal
friend when he was a young man; his statement that Joseph Smith was
one of two men from whom there "emanated a certain peculiar moral
stress and compulsion" which he had not felt in other men, has peculiar
significance.

In his chapter on Joseph Smith, in Figures of the Past, Mr. Quincy
comments as follows upon the resemblance between Joseph Smith and
Elisha R. Potter of Rhode Island, whom he met in Washington in 1826.
"The likeness was not such as would be recognized in a picture, but
rather one that would be felt in a grave emergency. Of all men I have
met, these two seemed best endowed with that kingly faculty which
directs, as by intrinsic right, the feeble or confused souls who are
looking for guidance. This it is just to say with emphasis; for the
reader will find so much that is puerile and even shocking in my
report of the prophet's conversation that he might {35} never suspect
the impression of rugged power that was given by the man. * * * The
prophet's hold upon you seemed to come from the balance and harmony of
temperament which reposes upon a large physical basis."

In the chapter on "Washington in 1826," Mr. Quincy writes the
following: Mr. Potter seemed to carry about with him a certain
homespun certificate of authority, which made it natural for lesser
men to accept his conclusions. Oddly enough, I have met only one other
individual who impressed me as possessing the same sort of personal
power, and he was one whose place in history is certain when the lives
of greater and better men are covered by oblivion; for the muse of
history postpones the claims of statesmen and poets to those of the
founders of religions, who, for good or evil, are more potent factors
in the destiny of mankind. Hereafter I may give an account of my visit
to Joseph Smith, in his holy city of Nauvoo. It is now sufficient to
mention that when I made the acquaintance of the Mormon prophet, I
was haunted with a provoking sense of having known him before; or,
at least, of having known some one whom he greatly resembled. And
then followed a painful groping and peering "into the dark backward
and abysm of time," in search of a figure that was provokingly
undiscoverable. At last the Washington of 1826 came before me, and the
form of Elisha R. Potter thrust itself through the gorges of memory.
Yes, that was the man I was seeking; yet the resemblance, after all,
could scarcely be called physical, and I am loath to borrow the word
"impressional" from the vocabulary of spirit mediums. Both were of
commanding appearance, men whom it seemed natural to obey. Wide as were
the differences between the lives and characters of these Americans,
there emanated from each of them a certain peculiar moral stress
and compulsion which I have never felt in the presence of others of
their countrymen. The position of Mr. Potter in his native State has
now faded to a dim tradition. It was of the authoritative kind which
belongs to men who bear from nature the best credentials.

{36}



DEDICATION OF PALESTINE.

At a general conference of the church held at Nauvoo, April 6th, 1840,
Apostles Orson Hyde and Hyrum E. Page were called to go on a mission to
Jerusalem for the purpose of dedicating that land for the gathering of
the House of Judah. They started upon this important mission but Elder
Page failed to continue the journey beyond the border of the United
States. Apostle Hyde therefore set out alone and accomplished the labor
assigned at said conference. In a letter dated at Alexandria, November
22nd, 1841, addressed to Parley P. Pratt, Brother Hyde, said:

    "A few minutes now offer for me to write, and I improve them in
    writing to you. I have only time to say that I have seen Jerusalem
    precisely according to the vision which I had. I saw no one with me
    in the vision; and although Elder Page was appointed to accompany
    me there, yet I found myself there alone. The Lord knows that I
    have had a hard time, and suffered much, but I have great reason
    to thank Him that I enjoy good health at present, and have a good
    prospect before me of soon going to a civilized country, where I
    shall see no more turbans or camels. The heat is most oppressive,
    and has been all through Syria. I have no time to tell you how many
    days I have been at sea without food, or how many snails I have
    eaten; but if I had had plenty of them, I should have done very
    well. All this is contained in a former letter to you written from
    Java. * * *

    "On Saturday morning, October 24th, a good while before day, I
    arose from sleep and went out of the city, as soon as the gates
    were opened, crossed the brook Cedron, and went upon the Mount of
    Olives, and there in solemn silence, with pen, ink and paper, just
    as I saw in the vision, offered up the following prayer to Him who
    lives forever and ever:

    "O Thou! who art from everlasting to everlasting, eternally and
    unchangeably the same, even the God who rules in the heavens
    above, and controls the destinies of men on the earth, wilt thou
    not condescend through thine infinite goodness and royal favor, to
    listen to the prayer of thy servant which he this day offers up
    unto thee in the name of the Holy child Jesus, upon this land where
    the Son of Righteousness sat in blood, and thine _Anointed One_
    expired.

    "Be pleased, O Lord, to forgive all the follies, weaknesses,
    vanities and sins of thy servant, and strengthen him to resist all
    future temptations. Give him prudence and discernment that he may
    avoid the evil, and a heart to choose the good; give him fortitude
    to bear up under trying and adverse circumstances, and grace to
    endure all things {37} for thy name's sake, until the end shall
    come, when all the Saints shall rest in peace.

    "Now, O Lord! Thy servant has been obedient to the heavenly
    vision, which thou gavest him in his native land; and under the
    shadow of thine outstretched arm, he has safely arrived in this
    place to dedicate and consecrate this land unto Thee, for the
    gathering together of Judah's scattered remnants, according to the
    predictions of the holy prophets--for the building up of Jerusalem
    again after it has been trodden down by the Gentiles so long, and
    for rearing a temple in honor of thy name. Everlasting thanks be
    ascribed unto thee, O, Father! Lord of heaven and earth, that thou
    hast preserved thy servant from the dangers of the seas, and from
    the plague and pestilence which have caused the land to mourn. The
    violence of many has also been restrained, and thy providential
    care by night and by day has been exercised over thine unworthy
    servant. Accept, therefore, O Lord, the tribute of a grateful heart
    for all past favors, and be pleased to continue thy kindness and
    mercy towards a needy worm of the dust.

    "O thou, who didst covenant with Abraham, thy friend, and who didst
    renew that covenant with Isaac, and confirm the same with Jacob,
    with an oath that thou wouldst not only give this land for an
    everlasting inheritance, but that thou wouldst also remember their
    seed forever. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob have long since closed their
    eyes in death, and made the grave their mansion. Their children are
    scattered and dispersed abroad among the nations of the Gentiles
    like sheep that have no shepherd, and are still looking forward for
    the fulfillment of those promises which thou didst make concerning
    them; and even this land, which once poured forth nature's richest
    bounty, and flowed, as it were, with milk and honey, has, to a
    certain extent, been smitten with barrenness and sterility since
    it drank from murderous hands the blood of Him who never sinned.
    Grant, therefore, O Lord, in the name of thy well beloved Son,
    Jesus Christ, to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land,
    and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirstly
    soil. Let the vine and the olive produce in their strength, and
    the fig tree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly
    fruitful, when possessed by its rightful heirs; let it again flow
    with plenty to feed the returning prodigals who come home with a
    spirit of grace and supplication; upon it let the clouds distill
    virtue and richness, and let the fields smile with plenty. Let
    the flocks and the herds greatly increase and multiply upon the
    mountains and hills; and let thy great kindness conquer and subdue
    the unbelief of thy people. Do thou take from them their stony
    heart, and give them a heart of flesh; and may the Son of thy
    favor dispel the cold mists of darkness which have beclouded their
    atmosphere. Incline them to gather in upon this land according
    to thy word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their
    windows. Let the large ships of nations bring them from the distant
    isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with
    motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eyes.

    "Thou, O Lord, did once move upon the heart of Cyrus to show favor
    unto Jerusalem and her children. Do thou now also be pleased
    to inspire the hearts of kings and the powers of the earth to
    look with a friendly eye towards this place. And with a desire
    to see thy righteous purposes executed in relation thereto. Let
    them know that it is thy good pleasure to restore the kingdom
    unto Israel--raise up Jerusalem as its capital, and constitute
    her people a distinct nation {38} and government, with David thy
    servant, even a descendant from the loins of ancient David, to
    be their king. Let that nation, or that people who shall take an
    active part in behalf of Abraham's children and in the raising
    up of Jerusalem, find favor in thy sight. Let not their enemies
    prevail against them, neither let pestilence or famine overcome
    them, but let the glory of Israel overshadow them, and the power of
    the highest protect them; while that nation or kingdom that will
    not serve thee in this glorious work must perish according to thy
    word--'Yea those nations shall be utterly wasted.'

    "Though thy servant is now far from his home, and from the land
    bedewed with his earliest tears, yet he remembers, O Lord, his
    friends who are there, and family, whom for thy sake he has left.
    Though poverty and privation be our earthly lot, yet ah! do Thou
    richly endow us with an inheritance where moth and rust do not
    corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal. The
    hands that have fed, clothed or shown favor unto the family of thy
    servant in his absence, or that shall hereafter do so, let them not
    lose their reward, but let a special blessing rest upon them, and
    in thy kingdom let them have an inheritance when thou shalt come to
    be glorified in this society. Do thou also look with favor upon all
    those through whose liberality I have been enabled to come to this
    land; and in the day when thou shalt reward all people according to
    their works, let these also not be passed by or forgotten, but in
    time let them be in readiness to enjoy the glory of those mansions
    which Jesus has gone to prepare. Particularly do thou bless the
    stranger in Philadelphia, whom I never saw, but who sent me gold,
    with a request that I should pray for him in Jerusalem. Now, O
    Lord, let blessings come upon him from an unexpected quarter, and
    let his basket be filled, and his store-house abound with plenty,
    and let not the good things of the earth be his only portion, but
    let him be found among those to whom it may be said, Thou hast been
    faithful over a few things, and I will make thee ruler over many."

    "O my Father in heaven! I now ask thee in the name of Jesus to
    remember Zion, with all her stakes, and with all her assemblies.
    She has been grievously afflicted and smitten; she has mourned;
    she has wept; her enemies have triumphed and have said--'Ah, where
    is thy God?' Her priests and prophets have groaned in chains
    and fetters within the gloomy walls of prison, while many were
    slain, and now sleep in the arms of death. How long, O Lord,
    shall iniquity triumph, and sin go unpunished? Do thou arise in
    the majesty of thy strength, and make bare thine arm in behalf of
    thy people. Redress their wrongs, and turn their sorrow into joy.
    Pour the spirit of light and knowledge, grace and wisdom, into the
    hearts of her prophets, and clothe her priests with salvation. Let
    light and knowledge march forth through the empire of darkness, and
    may the honest in heart flow to their standard, and join in the
    march to go forth to meet the Bridegroom.

    Let a peculiar blessing rest upon the Presidency of thy Church,
    for at them are the arrows of the enemies directed. Be thou to
    them a sun and a shield, their strong tower and hiding place; and
    in the time of distress or danger be thou near to deliver. Also
    the quorum of the Twelve, do thou be pleased to stand by, for thou
    knowest the obstacles which we have to encounter, the temptations
    to which we are exposed and privations which we must suffer. Give
    us, therefore, strength according to our day, and help us to bear a
    faithful {39} testimony of Jesus and His Gospel, and to finish with
    fidelity and honor the work which thou hast given us to do, and
    then give us a place in thy glorious kingdom. And let this blessing
    rest upon every faithful officer and member in thy Church. And all
    the glory and honor will we ascribe to God and the Lamb for ever
    and ever. Amen.

    * * * * *

    On the top of Mount Olives I erected a pile of stones as a witness
    according to the ancient custom. On what was anciently called Mount
    Zion, where the Temple stood, I erected another, and used the rod
    according to the prediction upon my head. I have found many Jews
    who listened with intense interest. The idea of the Jews being
    restored to Palestine is gaining ground in Europe almost every day.
    Jerusalem is strongly fortified with many cannons upon its walls.
    The wall is ten feet thick on the sides that would be most exposed,
    and four or five feet where the descent from the wall is almost
    perpendicular. The number of inhabitants within the walls is about
    twenty thousand. About seven thousand of this number are Jews, the
    balance being mostly Turks and Armenians. Many of the Jews who are
    old go to this place to die, and many are coming from Europe into
    this Eastern world. The great wheel is unquestionably in motion,
    and the word of the Almighty has declared that it shall roll. * * *

Speaking editorially of Elder Hyde's mission and the dedicatory prayer
offered, Brother Parley P. Pratt said:

    "Through his persevering exertions, and the prayer offered up on
    the Mount of Olives, the land is now consecrated and dedicated
    to the Lord for the restoration of Israel. It would seem by the
    war which is raging in that country that the ground is being
    disencumbered of the Catholics and other barbarian tribes, and
    is being vacated for the Jews, while seven thousand now dwell in
    Jerusalem, and great numbers of others in other parts of that land.

    "But O! when we read the prayer offered up on the holy mount--the
    same place where Jesus often prayed, yea the mount from which
    He ascended, and upon which He will again set His feet--when
    we reflect that God's covenant people (Israel) were prayed for
    there--that Zion and all her sufferings were rendered there--that
    the chains and fetters which we have worn, the dungeons where we
    have been confined for the testimony of Jesus, were mentioned there
    before the Lord--and that prayer recorded both in heaven and on
    earth to stand as an imperishable memorial to all generations, and
    to be answered speedily upon the wicked--when we reflect upon all
    these things, our feelings are too intense for utterance; they
    cannot be written; but when the nations behold it fulfilled, and
    Zion and Jerusalem become the joy of the whole earth, then will
    this prayer and the mission connected with it come to honorable
    remembrance. Which may the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob speedily
    grant, in the name of Jesus Christ."

{40}



THE RESURRECTION.

A Discourse by Brigham Young, President of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-Day Saints, Delivered in the New Tabernacle, Salt Lake City,
At the General Conference, October 8th, 1875.

I wish to present to the Latter-day Saints the doctrine of the
resurrection in its true light. To satisfy the philosophy of my own
mind in regard to this doctrine, I shall be under the necessity of
commencing with the works of God as we find them in the beginning, or
rather the beginning of the history we have of the earth. We admit the
history that Moses gives of the creation or organization of this earth,
as stated in his writings, to be correct. The philosophy of my mind,
with all the experience I have gained by observation and knowledge of
facts, tells me that there is nothing made, formed or fashioned without
a Being to make, form or fashion the same. Then my own reasoning
teaches me that myself as a mechanic, with all others upon this earth,
and those also who dwell in the heavens, when we commence any work of
mechanism, have an object in the same. God had an object in view when
He framed this earth and placed vegetation and all creatures upon it,
and man was brought here for the high object of an increase of wisdom,
knowledge, understanding, glory and honor--each and every person,
creature or thing in its own order and time, that all may harmonize
together and receive this glory and honor. The particles that compose
the earth were brought together for a certain purpose by its great
Author. This purpose was, and still is, to bring this earth and all
things upon it into a higher state of glory and intelligence. In the
beginning there were laws given by which all nature was to be governed
or controlled. It is true that man transgresses these laws, and would
change them if he had the power to do so. But there are laws which he
cannot disturb, and which operate regardless of man's actions. Among
these is the law which pertains to the resurrection of the body of man
and also to the resurrection of the earth; {41} for this earth has to
undergo a great change, or, in other words, has to be resurrected.

Abel, the martyr, was the first man of whose death we have any account.
He brought his offering to the Lord and was accepted. This proves that
he was a righteous man, and by his righteousness he so far sanctified
the particles of this earth that comprised the component parts of his
body that they became entitled to a glorious resurrection, which he
undoubtedly obtained when Jesus arose. If Abel had been eaten by dogs
or lions, the component parts of his body never could have gone to
compose the component parts of any other bodies. Why? Because the laws
which govern the elements would not permit this to be done.

The question may be asked, Do not the particles that compose man's
body, when returned to mother earth, go to make or compose other
bodies? No, they do not. Some philosophers have asserted that the
human body changes every seven or ten years. This is not correct, for
it never changes; that is, the substances of which it is composed do
not pass off and other particles of matter come and take their place.
Neither can the particles which have comprised the bodies of men become
parts of the bodies of other men, or of beasts, fowls, fish, insects
or vegetables. They are governed by a divine law, and though they may
pass from the knowledge of the scientific world, that divine law still
holds and governs and controls them. Man's body may be buried in the
ocean, it may be eaten by wild beasts, or it may be burned to ashes,
and they be scattered to the four winds, yet the particles of which
it is composed will not be incorporated into any form of vegetable or
animal life, to become a component part of their structure. Are they
gross, tangible, and, in their organized capacity, subject to decay and
change? Yes, and if buried in the earth, they undergo decomposition
and return to mother earth; but it is no matter how minute the
particles are, they are watched over and will be preserved until the
resurrection, and at the sound of the trumpet of God every particle of
our physical structures necessary to make our tabernacles perfect will
be assembled, to be rejoined with the spirit, every man in his order.
Not one particle will be lost.

I have a few questions to ask the philosophical world, those especially
who are well skilled in chemistry: Is this earth, the air and the
water, composed of life, or do they, or any portion of them, consist
of inanimate matter, or of that that has no life in itself? Another
question: If the earth, air and water are composed of life, is there
any intelligence in this life? {42} The philosopher may take his own
time to answer these questions, and when he has satisfied himself he
may ask himself again: Are those particles of matter life; if so, are
they in possession of intelligence according to the grade of their
organization? As far as we are concerned, we suggest the idea that
there is an eternity of life, an eternity of organization, and an
eternity of intelligence from the highest to the lowest grade, every
creature in its order, from the Gods to the animalculae. Bear in mind,
you who are believers in the resurrection or in the works of God, that
man has sought out many inventions and has striven hard to learn the
mysteries of God and godliness by his worldly wisdom, yet there are
many things which science, with all its tests, cannot find out. Matter
may be divided into an infinitude of atoms, until they pass beyond the
power of the microscope to discover them, and the most skilful chemist
who dwells upon the earth knows not whither they go. My position is,
and which I declare to the Latter-day Saints, it is beyond the power of
man, without revelation from God, with all his science to know whether
these particles that compose our bodies go into other creatures to form
the component parts of their bodies, or whether they merely pass into
the already organized body to resuscitate it and contribute to its
sustenance. I declare to the Latter-day Saints, and to all living upon
the earth who have intelligence to understand, that the particles that
comprise the component parts of our bodies will never enter into other
bodies to form the elements of their bodies; but these very identical
particles that now compose our bodies will be resurrected and come
together by the power of the trump of God and will be re-united to
form the body--excepting the blood, which will not be necessary to our
existence in an immortal state--and then be prepared to receive the
spirit, preparatory to their exaltation. Query: Would not the particles
that compose the body of our Savior, according to their intelligence,
oppose the idea of becoming a part of any other body but His? Again:
Would not the Saints, who are faithful in magnifying the Priesthood of
the Son of God, object to the particles which now compose their bodies,
and which they have sanctified through obedience to that Priesthood,
entering into and forming parts of other bodies than their own--bodies
which their spirits had not possessed and of which they knew nothing in
this life?

Although some may think that the substances of which our bodies are
composed are borrowed for our use during this mortal existence, it is
not so, neither will they be thrown off {43} at death, never to be
restored; and though in the resurrection the bodies of the righteous
will be raised immortal and free from all corruption, they will be
none the less tangible or perceptible to the touch of those who are
permitted to handle them. The question may be asked: Will the bodies of
those who do not observe the laws of God, and which are not sanctified
by obedience to them, come forth in the resurrection? Undoubtedly they
will; but not at the same time nor to the same glory that they do who
observe the laws of God.

The earth, also, abideth the law and filleth the measure of its
creation, and though it shall die, it shall be resurrected in glory, a
sanctified creation, suitable for the residence of celestial beings.
The elements will be burned and purified, and be renewed; but not one
atom of earth's organism will be lost; for that which is governed by
law shall be preserved by law. And for everything which our God has
created He has prescribed laws. There is nothing so minutes as to
escape His notice, there is no creation so immense as to transcend
the bounds of His power; all are alike subject to the operation of
His decrees. He called matter from chaos and created the earth, and
the heavens are studded with planets, the glorious workmanship of
His hands. He has hung those mighty orbs in space, and their courses
are fixed. And by the exercise of His power the original elements
which have formed the bodies of men will be brought forth in the
resurrection--bone to bone, sinew to sinew, flesh to flesh, not
one hair shall be lost--and all this in obedience to law, that the
substances which have formed the tabernacles of men, or of beasts, or
of fowls, or of fish, shall not be intermingled or lost; but shall be
all restored to their own places, though they may have been swallowed
up in the depths of the sea, or have been scattered to the four winds
of heaven.

To illustrate these facts connected with the resurrection of the body,
we will quote from the revelations which the Lord has given to His
children:

The Testimony of Ezekiel.

    The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the Spirit
    of the Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley which was
    full of bones,

    And caused me to pass by them round about: and, behold, there were
    very many in the open valley; and, lo, they were very dry.

    And He said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I
    answered, O Lord God, thou knowest.

    Again He said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto
    them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord,

    {44} Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones: Behold, I will cause
    breath to enter into you, and ye shall live;

    And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you,
    and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live;
    and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

    So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there was
    a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to
    his bone.

    And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them,
    and the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in them.

    Then said He unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man,
    and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord God: Come from the four
    winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.

    So I prophesied as He commanded me, and the breath came into them,
    and they lived, and stood upon their feet, an exceeding great army.

    Then He said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house
    of Israel; behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is
    lost; we are cut off for our parts.

    Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God:
    Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come
    up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

    And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your
    graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves,

    And shall put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall
    place you in your own land: then shall ye know that I the Lord have
    spoken it, and performed it, saith the Lord.--_Ezekiel xxxvii_:
    1-14.

The Testimony of Job.

    For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand at the
    latter day upon the earth:

    And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
    shall I see God:

    Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
    another; though my reins be consumed within me.--_Job xix_: 25-27.

The Testimony of Daniel.

    And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
    some to everlasting life and some to shame and everlasting
    contempt.--_Daniel xii_: 2.

The Testimony of Luke.

    Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the bush, when
    he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
    the God of Jacob.--_Luke xx_: 37.

    And as they thus spake, Jesus Himself stood in the midst of them,
    and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. But they were terrified and
    affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.

    And He said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts
    arise in your hearts?

    Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and
    see: for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

    And when He had thus spoken, He shewed them His hands and His feet.

    {45} And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, He said
    unto them, Have ye here any meat?

    And they gave Him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.
    And He took it, and did eat before them.--_Luke xxiv_: 36-43.

The Testimony of John.

    But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them
    when Jesus came.

    The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord.
    But he said unto them, Except I shall see in His hands the print
    of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and
    thrust my hand into His side, I will not believe.

    And after eight days again His disciples were within, and Thomas
    with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the
    midst, and said, Peace be unto you.

    Then saith He to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my
    hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and
    be not faithless, but believing.--_John xx_: 24-27.

    Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is,
    when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that
    hear shall live.

    Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that
    are in the graves shall hear His voice,

    And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the
    resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
    resurrection of damnation.--_John v_: 25, 28, 29.

    Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on
    such the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of
    God and of Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand years.

    And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell
    delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged
    every man according to their works.--_Revelations xx_: 6, 13.

The Testimony of Matthew.

    And the graves were opened, and many bodies of the saints which
    slept arose,

    And came out of the graves after His resurrection, and went into
    the holy city, and appeared unto many.--_Matthew xxvii_: 52, 53.

The Testimony of Paul.

    For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the
    Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ:

    Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto
    His glorious body, according to the working whereby He is able even
    to subdue all things unto Himself.--_Philippians iii_: 20, 21.

    But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell
    in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken
    your mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you.--_Romans
    viii_: 11.

    {46} Therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death; that
    like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
    Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

    For if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death,
    we shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection.--_Romans vi_:
    4, 5.

    For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised:

    And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your
    sins.

    Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.

    If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
    miserable.

    But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits
    of them that slept.

    For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of
    the dead.

    For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

    But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what
    body do they come?

    Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die:

    And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
    be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain:

    But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased Him, and to every seed
    his own body.

    All flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of
    men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of
    birds.

    So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption,
    it is raised in incorruption:

    It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in
    weakness, it is raised in power:

    It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is
    a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.--_1 Corinthians xv_:
    16-22; 35-39; 42-44.

    For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also
    which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him.

    For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are
    alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them
    which are asleep.

    For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
    the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead
    in Christ shall rise first.--_1 Thessalonians iv_: 14-16.

The Testimony of Abinadi.

    And if Christ had not risen from the dead, or have broken the bands
    of death, that the grave should have no victory, and that death
    should have no sting, there could have been no resurrection.

    But there is a resurrection, therefore the grave hath no victory,
    and the sting of death is swallowed up in Christ:

    He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is
    endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is
    endless, that there can be no more death.

    Even this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruption
    shall put on incorruption, and shall be brought to stand before the
    bar of God, to be judged of Him according to their works, whether
    they be good or whether they be evil.--_Book of Mosiah, xvi_: 7-10.

{47}

The Testimony of Jacob.

    For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfill the merciful plan
    of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection,
    and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the
    fall; and the fall came by reason of transgression; and because man
    became fallen, they were cut off from the presence of the Lord;

    Wherefore it must needs be an infinite atonement; save it should
    be an infinite atonement, this corruption could not put on
    incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man,
    must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this
    flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother
    earth, to rise no more.

    O the wisdom of God! His mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh
    should rise no more, our spirits must become subject to that angel
    who fell from before the presence of the eternal God, and became
    the devil, to rise no more.

    And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of
    Israel, this death of which I have spoken, which is the temporal,
    shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

    And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual
    death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell;
    wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell
    must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver
    up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men
    will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the
    resurrection of the Holy One of Israel.

    O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand, the
    paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous and
    the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit
    and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become
    incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a
    perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh; save it be that our
    knowledge shall be perfect.--_2 Nephi, ix_: 6-8; 11-13.

The Testimony of Amulek.

    For behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and
    stand before God, and be judged according to their works.

    Now there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the
    death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that
    all shall be raised from this temporal death;

    The spirit and the body shall be re-united again in its perfect
    form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame,
    even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to
    stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright
    recollection of our guilt.

    Now this restoration shall come to all, both old and young; both
    bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the
    righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their
    heads be lost; but all things shall be restored to its perfect
    frame, as it is now, or in the body.--_Book of Alma, xi_: 41-44.

The Testimony of Alma.

    But this much I say, that there is a space between death and the
    resurrection of the body, and a state of the soul in happiness or
    in misery, until the time which is appointed of God that the dead
    shall {48} come forth, and be re-united, both soul and body, and be
    brought to stand before God, and be judged according to their works;

    Yea, this bringeth about the restoration of those things of which
    have been spoken by the mouths of the prophets.

    The soul shall be restored to the body, and the body to the soul;
    yea, and every limb and joint shall be restored to its body; yea,
    even a hair of the head shall not be lost, but all things shall be
    restored to their proper and perfect frame.--_Book of Alma, xl_:
    21-23.

The Testimony of Samuel.

    For behold, He [Jesus] surely must die, that salvation may come;
    yea, it behooveth Him, and becometh expedient that He dieth, to
    bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be
    brought into the presence of the Lord;

    Yea, behold this death bringeth to pass the resurrection, and
    redeemeth all mankind from the first death.--_Book of Helaman,
    xiv_: 15, 16.

The Words of Jesus.

    And it came to pass that He [Jesus] said unto Nephi, bring forth
    the record which ye have kept.

    And when Nephi had brought forth the records, and laid them before
    His, He cast His eyes upon them and said,

    Verily I say unto you, I commanded my servant Samuel, the Lamanite,
    that he should testify unto this people, that at the day that the
    Father should glorify His name in me, that there were many saints
    who should arise from the dead, and should appear unto many, and
    should minister unto them. And He said unto them, were it not so?

    And His disciples answered Him and said, Yea, Lord, Samuel did
    prophesy according to Thy words, and they were all fulfilled.

    And Jesus said unto them, How be it that ye have not written this
    thing, that many saints did arise and appear unto many, and did
    minister unto them?

    And it came to pass that Nephi remembered that this thing had not
    been written.

    And it came to pass that Jesus commanded that it should be written;
    therefore it was written according as He commanded.--_3 Nephi,
    xxiii_: 7-13.

The Testimony of Moroni.

    And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ,
    they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is
    wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth
    to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption
    from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awoke by
    the power of God, when the trump shall sound; and they shall come
    forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before His bar,
    being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which
    death is a temporal death.--_Book of Mormon, ix_: 13.

Words of Jesus in Book of Doctrine and Covenants.

    Now, verily I say unto you, that through the redemption which is
    made for you is brought to pass the resurrection from the dead. And
    the spirit and the body is the soul of man.

    {49} And the resurrection from the dead is the redemption of the
    soul; And the redemption of the soul is through Him who quickeneth
    all things, in whose bosom it is decreed that the poor and the meek
    of the earth shall inherit it.

    Therefore it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness,
    that it may be prepared for the celestial glory;

    For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be
    crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father;

    That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever
    and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for
    this intent are they sanctified.

    And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a
    celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and
    transgresseth not the law.

    Wherefore it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall
    die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by
    which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it:

    For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again a
    spiritual body.

    They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body
    which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and
    your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened.

    And there shall be silence in heaven for the space of half an hour,
    and immediately after shall the curtain of heaven be unfolded, as a
    scroll is unfolded after it is rolled up, and the face of the Lord
    shall be unveiled;

    And the saints that are upon the earth, who are alive, shall be
    quickened, and be caught up to meet Him.

    And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth; for their
    graves shall be opened, and they also shall be caught up to meet
    Him in the midst of the pillar of heaven:

    They are Christ's, the first fruits: they who shall descend with
    Him first, and they who are on the earth and in their graves,
    who are first caught up to meet Him: and all this by the voice
    of the sounding of the trump of the angel of God.--_Doctrine and
    Covenants, lxxxviii_: 14-20; 25-28; 95-98.

    For a trump shall sound both long and loud, even as upon Mount
    Sinai, and all the earth shall quake, and they shall come forth,
    yea, even the dead which died in me, to receive a crown of
    righteousness, and to be clothed upon, even as I am, to be with me,
    that we may be one.

    And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be
    consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new
    earth,

    For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become
    new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof,
    both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the
    sea;

    And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the
    workmanship of mine hand.

    But, behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass
    away, Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then
    shall all the dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and
    they shall come forth; yea, even all.--_Doctrine and Covenants,
    xxix_: 13; 23-26.

    For the day cometh that the Lord shall utter His voice out of
    heaven; the heavens shall shake and the earth shall tremble, and
    the trump of God shall sound both long and loud, and shall say to
    the {50} sleeping nations, Ye saints arise and live; ye sinners
    stay and sleep until I shall call again.--_Doctrine and Covenants,
    xliii_: 18.

    But before the arm of the Lord shall fall, an angel shall sound his
    trump, and the saints that have slept shall come forth to meet me
    in the cloud;

    Wherefore if ye have slept in peace, blessed are you, for as you
    now behold me and know that I am, even so shall ye come unto me
    and your souls shall live, and your redemption shall be perfected,
    and the saints shall come forth from the four quarters of the
    earth.--_Doctrine and Covenants, xlv_: 45, 46.

    Yea, and blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforth
    when the Lord shall come, and old things shall pass away, and all
    things become new, they shall rise from the dead and shall not die
    after, and shall receive an inheritance before the Lord, in the
    holy city.

    And he that liveth when the Lord shall come, and has kept the
    faith, blessed is he; nevertheless it is appointed to him to die at
    the age of man;

    Wherefore children shall grow up until they become old, old men
    shall die; but they shall not sleep in the dust, but they shall be
    changed in the twinkling of an eye;

    Wherefore for this cause preached the apostles unto the world the
    resurrection of the dead.--_Doctrine and Covenants, lxiii_: 49-52.

Extract From A Revelation to the Prophet Joseph.

    And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to
    prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying, Blessed
    be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are
    opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I
    shall see God.--_Pearl of Great Price, p. 10_.

Extract From The Prophecy of Enoch.

    And righteousness will I send down out of heaven: and truth will
    I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only
    Begotten; His resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the
    resurrection of all men.--_Pearl of Great Price, p. 21_.

The Testimony of Joseph Smith.

As concerning the resurrection, I will merely say that all men will
come forth from the grave as they lie down, whether old or young; there
will not be "added one cubit to their stature," neither taken from it;
all will be raised by the power of God, having spirit in their bodies
and not blood.--_March 20, 1842; History of Joseph Smith_.

There are two kinds of beings in heaven, viz: angels, who are
resurrected personages, having bodies of flesh and bones.

For instance, Jesus said, "Handle me and see, for a spirit hath not
flesh and bones as ye see me have."

2. The spirits of just men made perfect--they who are not resurrected,
but inherit the same glory.

When a messenger comes, saying he has a message from God, offer him
your hand, and request him to shake hands with you.

{51} If he be an angel, he will do so, and you will feel his hand.

If he be the spirit of a just man made perfect, he will come in his
glory; for that is the only way he can appear.

Ask him to shake hands with you, but he will not move, because it is
contrary to the order of heaven for a just man to deceive; but he will
still deliver his message.

If it be the Devil as an angel of light, when you ask him to shake
hands, he will offer you his hand, and you will not feel anything; you
may therefore detect him.

These are three grand keys whereby you may know whether any
administration is from God.--_Thursday, February 9, 1843; History of
Joseph Smith. Doctrine and Covenants, cxxxix_.

Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will
rise with us in the resurrection;

And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life
through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much
the advantage in the world to come.

There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of
this world, upon which all blessings are predicted;

And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that
law upon which it is predicted.

The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son
also: but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a
personage of spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in
us.

A man may receive the Holy Ghost, and it may descend upon him and not
tarry with him.--_Sunday, April 2, 1843; History of Joseph Smith.
Doctrine and Covenants, cxxx_: 18-23.

To a remark of Elder O. Pratt's, that a man's body changes every
seven years, President Joseph Smith replied: There is no fundamental
principle belonging to a human system that ever goes into another in
this world or in the world to come: I care not what the theories of men
are. We have the testimony that God will raise us up, and He has the
power to do it. If any one supposes that any part of our bodies, that
is, the fundamental parts thereof, ever goes into another body, he is
mistaken.--_Friday, April 7, 1843; History of Joseph Smith_.

Speaking of the eternal duration of matter, I said--There is no such
thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine
or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes.

We cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified, we shall see that
it is all matter.--_Wednesday, May 17, 1843; History of Joseph Smith,
Doctrine and Covenants, cxxxi_: 7, 8.

As the Father hath power in Himself, so hath the Son power in Himself,
to lay down His life and take it again, so He has a body of His own.
The Son doeth what He hath seen the Father do; then the Father hath
some day laid down His life and taken it again; so He has a body of
His own, each one will be in His own body; and yet the sectarian world
believe the body of the Son is stuffed into the Father's.

Gods have an ascendancy over the angels, who are ministering servants.
In the resurrection, some are raised to be angels; others are raised to
become Gods.--_Sunday, June 11, 1843; History of Joseph Smith_.

{52}



CELESTIAL FAMILY ORGANIZATION.

By Parley P. Pratt in His Publication, "The Prophet," Published in New
York City, 1845.

Man is an eternal being, both in regard to his material organization
and his mind and affections. The resurrection from the dead restores
him to life with all his bodily and mental powers and faculties, and
(if quickened by the celestial glory) consequently associates him with
his family, friends and kindred, as one of the necessary links of the
chain which connects the great and royal family of heaven and earth
in one eternal bond of kindred affection and association. The order
of God's government, both in time and in eternity, is patriarchal;
that is, it is a fatherly government. Each father who is raised from
the dead and made a partaker of the celestial glory in its fullness,
will hold lawful jurisdiction over his own children and over all the
families which spring of them to all generations, forever and ever.

We talk, in this ignorant age, of children becoming of age, as it is
called; and we consider when they are of age they are free from the
authority of their father. But no such rule is known in the celestial
law and organization, either here or hereafter. By that law a son is
subject to his father forever and ever, worlds without end. Again, we
have a rule now established in the earth by which a woman becomes the
wife of a man, and is bound by law to him till death shall separate.
But in the celestial order it is not so, for the plainest of all
reasons, viz., the celestial order, is an order of eternal life; it
knows no death and consequently makes no provision for any. Therefore
all its covenants and contracts are eternal in their duration, and
calculated to bind the several members of a family in one eternal
union. In order to illustrate this subject and make it perfectly plain
to the most simple capacity we must leave death entirely out of the
consideration, and look at men and families just as we would look at
them if there was no death. This we can do with the greatest propriety
because the time was when there was no death, and the time will be
again in which there will be no death.

{53} Our venerable father Adam took our mother Eve for a wife when the
human family and the world in which they lived was as free from death
as God and His throne. We would now inquire what kind of contract was
made between them, and also how long was it to endure? Was it after the
power and union of an endless life? or was it made to serve a momentary
purpose, till death shall separate? The answer is obvious. This
marriage contract must have been eternal, or else it must have admitted
the sinful as well as cruel idea of a divorce and final separation
during their lives; for let it be borne in mind they had no death in
view and no idea of ever being subject to death, even for a moment, at
the time the contract was made.

Again, Paul opens a mystery, viz., that we shall not all sleep in the
dust; but those who live at a certain time will be changed in a moment,
in the twinkling of an eye, and will be caught up to meet the Lord and
so ever be with Him. Now as some of these will doubtless be husbands
and wives, we would inquire when their marriage contract will be
fulfilled and come to an end? They agreed to be each others till death
should separate (that is, if they were married by the usual ceremonies
which now exist). And behold, death cannot separate them; for the
change from mortal to immortal will be instantaneous.

Again, "Christ came to deliver those who through fear of death were all
their life time subject to bondage." Therefore, after the resurrection
men live, and live forever, as though death had never been. In view of
this, God declares himself to be the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
who have once died; and yet he claims not to be the God of the dead,
but of the living.

Again, Paul speaks of another great mystery, viz., "that every man
should love his wife even as Christ loves the Church." Now we would
inquire whether the love and consequent union of Christ and His Church
is to come to an end by death, and a final separation take place in
the world to come? or whether, on the other hand, the union is more
perfect and complete in the other life than it is in this? All agree
that the love and union of Christ and the Church is eternal, and that
it not only continues in the other world, but it is made perfect there.
This being the case, it leads us to the irresistible conclusion that
the love and union of a man and his wife should extend into, and even
be more perfect in eternity, or else Paul was very wrong in telling
every man to love his wife even as Christ loves the Church. Having {54}
established the fact or principle of eternal union between a man and
his wife, we will now proceed to establish the eternal relationship
and authority on one hand and obedience on the other, that will exist
between parents and children.

To illustrate this principle we have a beautiful and plain precedent.
Jesus Christ and His Father continue to be one in their affection and
union since He rose from the dead; and He still yields obedience to the
commands of His Father, and has also revealed that He will continue
to do so, when He has put down death, and all rule and authority and
power. "Then shall the Son also be subjected to the Father." We hear
nothing in all this subject about Jesus Christ ever being of age so
as to be free from all further obligation to obey His Father; but on
the contrary it is clearly revealed that He will always be subjected
to Him. Now this same Jesus prayed to His Father, as testified by the
Apostle John, that His disciples and those who believed on their words
might be one even as Christ and His Father are one; not only one with
God and Christ, but also one with each other in the same manner and in
the same sense that they are one. Now suppose, in fulfillment of this
prayer, a man and his children were His disciples; and finally in the
eternal world, they became one with each other in precisely the same
sense that Christ and His Father are one, would not these children be
subject to their father in the same manner as Christ is subject to His
Father? Certainly they would.

We have also a most beautiful practical illustration of the principles
of continued authority on the part of the father and obedience on the
part of the children in this life, in the family of Jacob. His sons
were, many of them, advanced in years so far as to become heads of
families at the time of going to Egypt for corn. And yet they all set
an example of obedience to their father, insomuch that they would not
take Benjamin with them without his consent, even if they starved to
death. It appears, too, that Abraham had the entire control of his son
Isaac's matrimonial affairs, although Isaac was forty years of age at
the time of his marriage with Rebecca.

Having now established the fact that the celestial order is designed
not only to give eternal life, but also to establish an eternal order
of family government, founded upon the most pure and holy principles of
union and affection, we will take a review of the celestial family of
man as it will exist in the restoration of all things spoken of by the
Holy Prophets.

First: His most gracious and venerable majesty, King Adam, with his
royal consort, Queen Eve, will appear at the {55} head of the whole
great family of the redeemed, and will be crowned in their midst as a
king and priest forever after the Son of God. They will then be arrayed
in garments white as snow and will take their seats on the throne, in
the midst of the paradise of God on the earth, to reign forever and
ever. While thousands of thousands stand before him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand minister unto him. And if you will receive it, this
is the order of the Ancient of days--the kingdom prepared and organized
to meet Jesus when He comes.

This venerable patriarch and sovereign will hold lawful jurisdiction
over Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, the
prophets, apostles, Saints of all ages and dispensations, who will
all reverence and obey him as their venerable father and lawful
sovereign. They will then be organized, each over his own department
of the government, according to their birthright and office, in their
families, generations and nations. Each one will obey and be obeyed
according to the connection which he sustains as a member of the
great celestial family. Thus the gradation will descend in regular
degrees from the throne of the Ancient of days with his innumerable
subjects, down to the least and last Saint of the last days who may
be counted worthy of a throne and sceptre, although his kingdom may,
perhaps, only consist of a wife and single child. Such the order
and organization of the celestial family, and such the natures of
the thrones, principalities and powers, which are the rewards of
diligence. This kingdom, organized and established upon the earth in
its beauty and order, will be ready for the Son of man. He will then
come in the clouds of heaven and receive it to himself. Adam and all
the patriarchs, kings and prophets will still be subject unto Christ,
because He was in the eternal world, the first born of every creature,
and the beginning of the creation of God. Hence in the patriarchal
order, He rules by right of birth.

"If I tell you earthly things and ye believe not, how shall ye believe
if I tell you of heavenly things?" I might enlarge on the subject by
connecting the family of Adam with other branches of Christ's kingdom,
and of the celestial family in other planets and worlds, many of which
are older and much larger than our earth, but peopled by branches of
the celestial family, who are of the same kindred and race that we
are, viz., the sons and daughters of God. I might also tell you of the
continued exertions of creative power by which millions of new worlds
will yet be formed and peopled by King Adam and his descendants, in
the name, and by the authority of Jesus Christ, and by virtue of the
Holy Priesthood which is after the power {56} of the endless life,
without beginning of days or end of years, and thus go on enlarging and
multiplying, conquering and to conquer, till Abraham's seed becomes
numerous as the sand; and till the Saint of the last days possess
a kingdom and dominion of his own posterity, vastly more numerous
than King Adam will possess in the great restoration of all things
pertaining to this little earth. But you are not able to receive
heavenly things as yet, and therefore forbear, and let the things of
the earth suffice at least for the present, and till the Saints should
be counted worthy of endowment and of an entrance into the sanctuary of
our God. For there shall the greater things be made manifest to those
who are not overcome and are counted worthy.

I now wish to say a few words on the subject of matrimony and also on
the subject of raising and educating children.

Who that has had one glimpse of the order of the celestial family and
of the eternal connections and relationships which should be formed
here in order to be enjoyed there; who that has felt one thrill of the
energy and power of eternal life and love which flows from the divine
spirit of revelation, can ever be contented with the corrupt pleasures
of a moment which arise from the unlawful connections and desires? Or
what Saint who has any degree of faith in the power of the resurrection
and of eternal life, can be contented to throw themselves away by
matrimonial connection with sectarians or other worldlings who are so
blind that they can never secure an eternal union by the authority of
the Holy Priesthood which has power to bind that which shall be bound
in heaven? By such a union, or by corrupt, unlawful and unvirtuous
connections and indulgences they not only lose their own celestial
crown and throne, but also plunge their children into ruin and
darkness, which will probably cause them to neglect so great salvation
for the sake of the love and the praise of the world and the traditions
of men.

O my friends--my brethren and sisters, and especially the younger class
of our community! I beseech you in the fear and love of God and entreat
you in view of eternal glory and exaltation in this kingdom, to deny
yourselves all the corrupt and abominable practices and desires of the
world and the flesh, and seek to be pure and virtuous in all your ways
and thoughts, and not only so, but make no matrimonial connections or
engagements till you have asked counsel of the Spirit of God in humble
prayer before Him; till you know and understand the principles of
eternal life and union sufficiently to act wisely and prudently, and in
that way that {57} will eventually secure yourself and companion and
your children in the great family circle of the celestial organization.

I would now say to parents that their own salvation, as well as that of
their children, depends to a certain extent on the bringing up of their
children, and educating them in the truth, that their traditions and
early impressions may be correct. No parent who continues to neglect
this after they themselves have come to the knowledge of the truth,
can be saved in the celestial kingdom. I would earnestly recommend
that all sectarian books, tracts, pictures, paintings, etc., which
are not according to the truth, be removed from the family circle of
the Saints, and that their children be not suffered to read them, at
least till the truth has taken hold of their minds sufficiently that
they may be able to contrast the one with the other; and to perceive
the difference. Sectarian sermons and their manner of worship and
their Sunday schools, are also a great damage to children, being well
calculated to rivet upon their young and tender minds the most vague,
mysterious and erroneous notions and principles which may prevent their
ever being open to the conviction of the truth. And even if they should
embrace the truth afterwards, and they find their perceptive faculties
so blunted and beclouded by early impressions and traditions, that it
will continue to retard their progress in the comprehension of the
truth, insomuch that many of its plainest and simplest principles will
either remain entirely unperceived by them or else be seen through a
glass darkly, as it were, and thus lose much of their force and beauty.
* * *

In regard to matrimony, I suppose some will tell me that in the
resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage. That is
true, for the best of all reasons--because they do it here; and thus
bind on earth that which shall be bound in heaven, and that too by
God's own authority; and this being the world of preparation and that
the world of enjoyment. Therefore there is no need of doing it in that
world. Those who do not understand and attend to the ordinances and
authority of God in this world, neither by themselves nor by proxy,
are not counted worthy to enjoy the celestial glory in the world to
come; therefore, they must remain as they are, and never enjoy that
sweet union and exaltation which is prepared for the Saints of the
Most High. Thus are all judged according to the deeds done in the
body; and that which they sow they shall also reap. If they choose
in this world to follow the wicked lusts and pleasures of the moment
by unlawful connections; or if they choose to be {58} united after
the manner of this world by being joined with a companion who is not
worthy of an eternal covenant and of the "seal of the living God," why
then, the consequence is, that they enjoy the things of this world and
the pleasures and passions thereof; but death closes the scene and
eternity finds them poor wanderers and outcasts from the commonwealth
of the celestial family and strangers to the covenant of promise.
Their former covenants come to an end with their life, and in that
world they can neither marry nor be given in marriage; consequently
they must remain unassociated in family capacity, and, therefore, have
no kingdom over which to reign, nor any possible means of increasing
their own glory. There will be weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth
indeed; for who can endure eternal disappointment? Who can endure to
be forever banished and separated from father, mother, wife, children,
and every kindred affection, and from every family tie? For none of
our relationships will be recognized by the authorities in this world,
unless secured to us here in an everlasting covenant which cannot be
broken, and sealed by the constituted authorities of the living God.
Well did the Lord promise by the mouth of the Prophet Malachi that
He would send Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord; and that he should turn, seal, or bind the
hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to
the fathers, lest the whole earth should be smitten with a curse. And
if you will receive it, Elijah the prophet has been sent in these last
days to man on the earth, and has conferred the keys of the sealing
power that others might go forth in His Spirit, power and Priesthood,
and seal both on earth and in heaven. But they have done unto some of
them whatever they listed, and even so many others perhaps suffer under
their cruel hand. But the keys are on the earth and shall not be taken
from it till the sealing is accomplished. Therefore, O ye Saints of
the Most High! build the Temple and sanctuary of our God, and gather
together thereunto. For there, saith the Lord, will I reveal unto you
the fullness of mine ordinances pertaining to the Holy Priesthood and
preparation, by which the living and the dead may be redeemed and
associated in the exalted principles of eternal life and joy. Amen.

{59}



SALVATION FOR THE LIVING AND THE DEAD.

Liberality of the "Mormon" Faith. A Discourse by Charles W. Penrose.
Delivered in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, Sunday Afternoon, August
19, 1900.

Reported by Arthur Winter.

I am thankful for the opportunity of meeting with the Latter-day Saints
in this Tabernacle, and I trust that our assembling together will not
be in vain, but be profitable to all of us. I have been called upon
to address the congregation. I desire to do so under the influence of
that Spirit which guides into all truth, and which makes plain the
things of God to the minds of men. I trust that this Spirit will not
only rest upon me, to enlighten my mind and to give me words which will
be of benefit to those who hear, but that it may also rest upon the
congregation, that we may be able to see "eye to eye."

Characteristics of True Religion.

One mark of true religion is a regard for the welfare of other people.
True religion does not make people selfish. It creates in their hearts
a feeling of chanty and a desire to bless; not to injure in any way,
not to wish the downfall or hurt of a fellow creature, but rather to
desire his uplifting, and benefit, and comfort, and joy. Our Heavenly
Father created the earth upon which we live for the comfort and
happiness of His creatures. The plan of salvation, which was prepared
before the foundations of the world, was designed for the improvement,
the benefit and the ultimate salvation of all His sons and daughters.
When we have a desire in our hearts to bless and benefit mankind, we
have the right side. When we feel a spirit of revenge, of retaliation,
and a desire to do harm, that is not of God, but is from beneath. Our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, we are told, "came into the world, not to
condemn the world, but that the world through Him might be saved." That
was the purpose of the coming of our Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh,
and of the atonement that He wrought out for mankind by His death on
the cross. The {60} spirit of Christ is the spirit of salvation, the
spirit of blessing, the spirit to do good, to improve the condition of
the human race, and to prepare us all for the presence of our Eternal
Father and to enjoy the glory of His kingdom.

Universal Salvation.

One of the great differences between the faith of the Latter-day Saints
and that of most of the denominations called "Christian" is that the
Latter-day Saints teach that salvation is for all people, of all ages,
of all races, of all colors, who can be saved. The doctrine that the
Lord has revealed through His servant the Prophet Joseph Smith is that
salvation is to come unto all, and that none will be lost who can
possibly be redeemed; that the plan of salvation is as broad as the
fall of man. Our first parents broke a divine law, and through their
disobedience death came into the world. As by disobedience of one man
sin, and death as the wages of sin, came into the world, so by the
atonement and obedience of one, life and salvation will ultimately come
to all the family of Adam. "As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all
be made alive." This doctrine was enunciated by the Apostle Paul in his
epistle to the Corinthians. The full meaning of that is not explained
in the old scriptures, neither is it understood generally in the
Christian world, but it was revealed in great plainness to the Prophet
Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon. I will not read to you the vision which
was given to them, explaining this doctrine of salvation, but will
perhaps read a few verses of it, so that the full extent of the plan of
salvation may be comprehended to some little degree by the congregation.

Let me say, first, that the book from which I am about to read contains
some of the revelations of God to the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints in this age of the world, and we regard these as
Scripture. We believe in the Bible. We believe that "holy men of old
wrote and spoke as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost." We also
believe that the same Spirit in this age of the world will make plain
the things of God exactly in the same way as they were revealed in
former times. In other words, we believe that the Spirit is the same
in all ages, and that God and Christ are "the same yesterday, today
and forever." If God could reveal His word through Prophets in ancient
times, certainly He can reveal His word, through Prophets in modern
times. If not, why not? What reason is there that God should not make
{61} manifest His truth in the nineteenth century as well as in the
first century, or in times before the beginning of the Christian era?
Has the Eternal Father ceased to have power to make Himself manifest?
Has He bound Himself with an oath and promise that He would not speak
again, after He revealed Himself through the Prophets and Apostles in
the first age of the Christian era and before that time? If so, where
is His word and promise recorded? I know of nothing of the kind in
the book that is supposed to contain the Holy Scriptures. The Bible
contains some few things revealed by the Lord through His servants in
former days, and by reading it carefully I find that it contains an
abundance of promises that in the last times, in the times of "the
restitution of all things spoken of by the holy Prophets since the
world began," in the "dispensation of the fullness of times" in which
God is to gather together in one all things that are in Christ, there
is to be more light, more revelation, more manifestation of the power
of God, greater miracles and greater outpouring of the Spirit and the
knowledge of God, until the time shall come when a man shall not have
to say to his neighbor, "Know ye the Lord, for all shall know Him, from
the least unto the greatest," and "the knowledge of God shall cover
the earth as the waters cover the great deep;" so the prophets of old
predicted. This being so there is nothing unscriptural or unreasonable
in the idea that God should reveal His word in this age of the world as
He revealed it in former times, and as it was customary with Him when
He had any special work to perform among the children of men, or any
special truth to reveal, to raise up a prophet or prophets through whom
His word was communicated, that in the last days He should act in the
same way, seeing that He is an unchangeable Being.

We testify that in the nineteenth century our Heavenly Father has
been pleased to open the heavens once more, and to send His Son Jesus
Christ, our Redeemer, with a message of life and light, similar to that
which He proclaimed when He tabernacled in mortality. We testify that
angels have come down from the courts of glory, bringing light and
truth for the enlightenment and salvation of all the human family, and
a message to be carried to "every nation, kindred, tongue and people."

We recognize the fact that throughout Christendom there are various
religious societies, composed in the main of good people, and having
among them very talented men, some of whom minister in the name of the
Lord without authority, {62} while others explain the Gospel according
to their understanding of it--which is very limited; and that there are
people of all sects and denominations who desire to serve the Lord and
walk in His ways, but who cling to the notions and ideas which have
been handed down to them by tradition. We do not wish to interfere with
any of them in their religious rights and privileges. We recognize the
right of every man to worship God according to the dictates of his own
conscience, and think that people ought not to be molested in that
worship, and that they should be perfectly free to carry out their
religious convictions, so long as they do not infringe upon the rights
and liberties of others. That is the line we draw, and when men step
beyond that, then the secular law ought to step in and protect people
in the exercise of their rights, and from the designs and wicked acts
of those who seek to infringe upon them.

But One God and One Faith.

But while we recognize this, we do not lose sight of this one great
fact, which all people should consider; that as there is but one God
for us to worship, there can be but one true religion. A variety of
Gods might introduce a variety of creeds; but "there is one God even
the Father, of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
are all things." Therefore, the religion of God and Christ must be
one. Truth is not divided against itself. Truth and error will clash,
but truth and truth will always harmonize. Anything that God reveals
must be true, for He is truth; and everything that comes by the way
of Jesus Christ, His beloved Son, must be true, for He is the way,
the truth and the life. No error will be introduced into the world
under the direction of the Father, or of the Son. And the Holy Ghost
is "the Spirit of truth." It guides into all truth. It takes of the
things of the Father and of the Son and reveals them unto men. It will
not substantiate or reveal any error; but it will manifest truth and
make it plain. Therefore, all that is error in the world, whether it
be among Christians or pagans, is not of God, and is not recognized of
Him. It will not lead to God; it will not benefit mankind; but it will
do injury. It is the truth that exalts, that ennobles, and that will
save mankind. Falsehood and error will not. Anything that is contrary
to truth cannot be of God, but may be of that Evil One, who was "a liar
from the beginning."

{63}

Sincerity Not Conclusive Evidence of Truth.

That there is an abundance of error in the "Christian" world as well
as some truth, must be patent to everybody who has investigated the
conditions of mankind in the present day, because these multifarious
sects and denominations are discordant. They do not unite--except on
special occasions when they meet together to denounce the "Mormons";
they can unite on that question sometimes. The spirit of division,
strife and contention exists among people called Christians as well
as among people called Pagans. That fact alone makes it evident that
there is a great deal of error existing in what is called Christendom.
That is because these various systems which have been established are
the inventions of men. They may have been good men who started these
different sects--I will not judge that matter; that is with the Eternal
Judge--but these sects were the offspring of men. These men may have
read the Scriptures, and have entertained certain ideas founded upon
their reading; and they may have established these different systems in
accordance with their sincere ideas of what was right. But sincerity
of itself is not a conclusive evidence of truth. The heathen is just
as sincere in his idol worship as the "Christian" is in his various
modes of bowing down to Deity; and certainly the Latter-day Saints have
manifested their sincerity before the whole world as well as before
the heavens. The Elders of this Church who go out into the world to
proclaim the Gospel as they understand it, manifest their sincerity.
Yet our "Christian" friends will not recognize them as Christians,
nor believe that they are right. They go out without purse or scrip,
without fee or reward. They are not paid for their work. They make
sacrifice of home and its comforts, and leave their loved ones behind,
and go to face a frowning world, to meet persecution and obloquy, and
sometimes imprisonment, stripes and death. What for? To proclaim that
which they know in their hearts is true. They are sincere enough,
but that does not prove that they are right. Our "Christian" friends
will acknowledge that. On the other hand, the sincerity that may be
exhibited in the various "Christian" sects by the people who compose
the members, and by the preachers who teach them, is not of itself an
evidence that they are right or that they have the truth. But the fact
that they are divided and conflicting is proof enough that there is a
great deal of error among them.

Now, that which comes from God is truth. If Jesus {64} Christ has a
church on the earth under His direction and inspiration, containing
men whom He has appointed, who hold His authority, who are sent by His
word, and who have the divine authority to administer in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that church will
have the truth. It will not have error intermingled with it, because
it will be directed by Christ, being His Church. Men may build up a
church and call it the Church of Christ, but that does not make it so;
it is the church of the men who organized it. If John Wesley--a good
man, as I believe with all my heart, a mighty man, who did a great and
good work in the earth--organized a religious society and called it
the Church of Christ, that does not make it so, and it is nothing more
than the church of John Wesley. If other good men assemble together
and agree on points of doctrine and organize a religious society that
society is theirs. It is not God's unless He ordered it, revealed it,
and accepted it.

Oneness of the Church of Christ.

I think that these simple ideas will be received by this congregation
and by any reasonable person. If Jesus Christ had a church on the earth
in the first century, it was the Church that He established. There is
evidence that He did establish a church. By reading the New Testament
it is plain that He organized it Himself; therefore it was His Church.
He placed in it apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors and teachers,
(so we read in the epistle to the Ephesians, 4th chapter,) "for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God." These men were sent
out to preach the Gospel without purse or scrip. They were commanded
to "go into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature."
And the principles which they taught were the principles of Jesus
Christ. The plan of salvation that they introduced was divine. It was
not their own. When Paul preached to the Gentiles and Peter preached
to the Jews, they preached the same Gospel, the same doctrine, by
the same Spirit. The people who received their word and repented of
their sins, believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, were all baptized by
one spirit into one body. There was but one body, no matter how many
members there were in it; there was but one church, no matter how many
branches there might be to it. The Church was one, the Gospel was one,
the God they worshipped was {65} one, the Savior was one. There was
"one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all;" and the
path that they walked in was the one way marked out by the Lord Jesus
Christ, who said, "Wide is the gate and broad is the way, that leadeth
to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat; because straight
is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few
there be that find it."

These men whom the Lord placed in His Church had the word of the Lord.
God revealed Himself unto them. Jesus Christ manifested Himself unto
them. This is one of the characteristics of the Church. It was in
communication with its Divine Author. The spirit that came down from
heaven was in these men; not only in them, but in the body of the
Church. The whole body was quickened by it, led by it, and inspired
by it. Therefore the truth was in the Church. But there came a great
change after the Apostles were slain. Darkness came in like a flood and
overspread the earth, as the prophet of old foresaw when he said that
"darkness would cover the earth and gross darkness the people." Because
of that darkness which has overspread the earth has come the condition
that exists in the Christian world today.

True Gospel Again Revealed From Heaven.

Now, in this age of the world, I repeat, our Heavenly Father has been
pleased to reveal Himself again. Hear it! oh, ye people! As sure as
the sun shines in the heavens, as sure as we are in this Tabernacle
this afternoon, the Mighty God, even the Lord, hath spoken, and is
"calling the earth from the rising of the sun to the going down
thereof." His word to all people is that the Gospel in its purity has
been restored; His Church has been set up again on the earth, under
His personal direction; Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers once more are endowed with the Spirit that comes from on
high, and all people who receive their testimony and are obedient to
the Gospel are baptized by one spirit into one body, whether they be
Jew or Gentile, bond or free, and they are all made to partake of one
Spirit. This Gospel and the proclamation thereof is to all the world,
to every creature. This is the commandment of God to His servants in
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. And all people will
hear the sound thereof, no matter how much it may be opposed. The
Elders of this Church, going out as the servants of God did of old, are
endowed with the same authority, the same power, and the same right to
{66} administer in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. And the word of Christ is to them as it was to the early
Apostles: "He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth
me receiveth Him that sent me. And he that rejecteth you rejecteth Him
that sent me." The word of the Lord to all people everywhere is to turn
from their wickedness, from their corruptions, from their false creeds,
from their bowing down to anything that is not God, from the notions
and ideas of men that have been preached in the world for the doctrines
of Christ, and come unto God their Eternal Father in humility, in
contrition, repenting of their sins, confessing them, and forsaking
them.

Gospel Will Be Preached To Every Soul.

This is a corrupt age. The world is full of evil. That perhaps may be
considered an extravagant term, for there is without doubt a great
deal of good in the world as well as evil; but I mean to say that evil
abounds everywhere. Take your "Christian" cities--those that have the
most churches and chapels dedicated to "Christian" service--and sin,
corruption, vice, and evils that are unmentionable, abound in them.
The word of God to all people is to repent, and turn from iniquity,
and come unto the Lord, that they may be saved. This Gospel will be
preached to every nation, tongue and people. The barriers that are now
in the way of the progress of the servants of God will be broken down.
War, plague, pestilence, famine, earthquake, the devouring fire, the
cyclone and the whirlwind will be agencies in the hands of an offended
Deity to open up the way for the spread of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Nations that today sit in darkness will hear it, and the "Christian"
nations will hear it; for the word of the Lord is to the priest as well
as to the people, to the king as well as to the peasant, to those in
high places as well as to those who grovel in filth and dirt on the
earth or beneath its surface. To all people everywhere this Gospel is
to go. Those nations where it is now impossible to proclaim the Gospel
freely will be so overturned in the providences of our Father in this
fast age, that all nations will be opened and the Elders of this Church
will carry the message to the uttermost parts of the earth.

Now in regard to people who will not receive the Gospel when it is
presented to them. When they reject it, they reject the Lord. But are
they to be everlastingly lost and destroyed? If so, only a few people
among the great family of the Eternal {67} Father would obtain the
blessings of salvation. What I will read to you from this book relates
to the final condition of the human race. As I said, I will not attempt
to read the whole of it; it would take too long. I will read only a
few verses. But I recommend all people to read it fully. I consider
it the most glorious manifestation of light and truth concerning the
future of mankind that has ever been put in print. There is nothing
in the Bible equal to this manifestation from God, of His plans and
purposes regarding His children who dwell on the earth. The first part
of this revelation contains the statement that Joseph Smith and Sidney
Rigdon, being in the Spirit on the 16th day of February, 1832, were
surrounded by His power and light, and they beheld the Father seated
upon His throne, and Jesus Christ, His Son, at His right hand, and
the angels that surround the throne and worship before their face.
The Lord manifested in this vision the conditions of the human family
in the world to come, who will be partakers of the various degrees of
glory--the celestial glory, the terrestrial glory, and the telestial
glory. The part I wish to read is this:

    "And this is the Gospel, the glad tidings which the voice out of
    the heavens bore record unto us:

    "That He came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the
    world, and to bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the
    world, and to cleanse it from all unrighteousness;

    "That through Him all might be saved whom the Father had put into
    His power and made by Him,

    "Who glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of His hands,
    except those sons of perdition, who deny the Son after the Father
    has revealed Him;

    "Wherefore He saves all except them: they shall go away into
    everlasting punishment, which is endless punishment, which is
    eternal punishment, to reign with the devil and his angels in
    eternity, where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched,
    which is their torment.

    "And the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their torment,
    no man knows." (Doctrine and Covenants, section 76, vs. 40-45.)

But Few Will Be Lost.

My friends, the great truth is declared in this revelation that Jesus
Christ will ultimately save ALL mankind, except a few who are called
the sons of perdition, "who deny the Son after the Father has revealed
Him." This is a very different idea of the plan of salvation to that
which is entertained by most if not all our "Christian" friends, who
say that we are very illiberal. They have an idea that the Latter-day
Saints are very exclusive and illiberal in their religion. I wish to
{68} say here that there is no creed in Christendom which is so liberal
as that which is believed in by the Latter-day Saints. We do not hold
that all who differ with us in regard to the principles of salvation
will be irretrievably lost. We do not consign our "Christian" friends,
as they do us, to an everlasting hell, to frizzle and fry in brimstone
and fire while eternity comes and goes; not at all. We do not believe
that our Eternal Father will condemn any person who acts according to
his sincere belief and who endeavors, as far as he can, to understand
and practice what is true. The understanding and the practice of
truth is that which exalts; and the time will come--according to our
faith--when everybody who dwells on the earth, and those who have dwelt
here and have gone away, will hear the sound of this one Gospel; for,
as I said, there can be but one Gospel, one way of salvation, and all
those who do not get into that one way are in the broad way.

There are millions and millions of heathens who never heard the name
of Jesus Christ. What is to become of them all? There are millions of
Jews who reject Jesus Christ as the Savior of the world. Are they all
to be lost eternally? They will be, according to the doctrines of some
of our very liberal "Christian" friends. According to their doctrines,
no one will be saved who does not believe in Jesus Christ. And they
have warrant for that in the Scripture; for "there is none other name
given under heaven whereby men can be saved, than the name of Christ
Jesus." That being true, all who do not hear the name of Jesus Christ
and believe in Him will be condemned. If, therefore, only while men
dwell in the flesh they may hear the name of Christ and have the
privilege of obeying His Gospel, then the vast majority of the human
race, the sons and daughters of the Eternal God, will be doomed to
everlasting punishment, according to the modern creeds. But according
to what the Lord has shown to this Church by revelation, this Gospel
will be preached to every creature. If people do not hear it while they
dwell in the flesh, they will hear it after they leave the body. That
is contrary to the doctrine of modern Christendom, I am aware. It comes
right in contact with one of the tenets of faith of all "Christian"
sects. They do not believe in the doctrine of preaching to men after
they are dead. They do not believe that there is salvation for mankind
after they leave this body. To use expressions common with them, "As
the tree falls, so it lies;" "as death meets us, so judgment finds us;"
"There's {69} no repentance in the grave, or pardon offered to the
dead." That is modern "Christianity."

Salvation For the Dead.

But that is not the Christianity of Christ. I would direct the
attention of my friends to the book of the Prophet Isaiah. I will not
take time to turn to it this afternoon. Read the 61st chapter, 1st
verse, and you will find there this prophecy concerning the coming of
the Redeemer: (See also 42nd chapter, 7th verse.)

    "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath
    anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me
    to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives,
    and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim
    the acceptable year of the Lord."

Jesus Christ accepted that as a prediction concerning Himself, as you
will read in the Gospel according to St. Luke, (iv, 18) by getting up
in the synagogue on the Sabbath day and reading that Scripture to the
Jews, testifying that it referred to Himself. Jesus, while He dwelt
in the flesh, preached good tidings to the meek. He healed the sick;
He comforted those that mourned; He bound up the brokenhearted. But
how about proclaiming liberty to the captives, and the opening of the
prison to them that were bound? The Apostle Paul says that when Jesus
was raised up on high "He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men." How did He lead captivity captive? Why, Peter explained it, but
the eyes of the "Christian" world have been closed to it for hundreds
of years. In the 3rd chapter of the 1st Epistle of Peter, 18-20 vs., we
read:

    "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the
    unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the
    flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went."

Now, mark it. He was put to death in the flesh; He was quickened by the
Spirit; and He went--where? Our "Christian" friends say He went up to
heaven. That is a mistake, because Jesus after His resurrection, when
He appeared to Mary in the garden, said, "Touch me not; for I am not
yet ascended to my Father." (John xx, 17.) Where did He go, Peter? Let
us hear what he says:

    "By which also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison."

Yes; Isaiah said He should "preach deliverance to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that were {70} bound." He went and
preached unto the spirits in prison. Who were they, Peter? He tells us:

    "Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of
    God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing."

Now, if we will take that just as it stands, and leave out the
interpretations given by uninspired men and the nonsense preachers
weave around it to mystify, we can understand it right enough. Jesus
Christ was put to death in the flesh; He was quickened by the Spirit;
His body lay in the sepulchre, while He went and preached to the
spirits in prison, who had been there since the days of the flood. What
did He preach to them? We can find that out by reading the sixth verse
of the next chapter of this epistle:

    "For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are
    dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but
    live according to God in the spirit."

Here is an account of what was preached to them and the object of the
preaching. He preached the Gospel to them, the same Gospel that He
preached in the flesh. He preached it to them that they might be judged
as men in the flesh are, because they had the same Gospel preached to
them. They could not be judged like men in the flesh unless they had
the same Gospel preached to them as men in the flesh had. The heathen
who never heard the Gospel cannot be judged like those who have heard
it; but if they hear it in the spirit, then they can be judged in
the same way as other men are judged in the flesh; and they may live
according to God in the spirit, because they can repent and receive
that Gospel.

This is clear and plain to those who desire to understand it. But when
men do not want the truth; when men live by publishing falsehoods; when
men preach for hire and divine for money, and their craft is in danger,
they do not want to see it, nor do they want their congregations to
perceive it. We can thus understand what I read to you just now from
this modern revelation. Jesus Christ died for the sins of the world,
and He will eventually save all, except a few who are called the sons
of perdition, who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him, who
sin against the Holy Ghost, and against light and truth, and who are
irredeemable. But all things that can be saved will be; for our God is
a great economist. Everything in His universe is put to a good use,
and nothing is lost. Not a particle of matter is annihilated. You may
burn a {71} substance and destroy its present form, but the particles
thereof remain, the original elements abide; they are indestructible,
and God has a use for them somewhere in His universe. Our Heavenly
Father will save everything that can be saved, and He will put it
somewhere where it can be of use. All His sons and daughters, at some
time or other in the eternity to come, will hear the Gospel, and will
bow the knee; for as we are told in the New Testament, "As I live,
saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to Me, and every tongue shall
confess to God." And also: "Every tongue shall confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father." (Philip, ii: 2.) And
then when they do bow the knee and receive Christ as their Redeemer, He
will redeem and save them; He will take them out of the prison house,
and He will lead captivity captive, again and again, until every son
and daughter of Adam's race who can be saved will be brought out of
hell and death, darkness and despair, suffering and punishment, and
placed somewhere where they can enjoy existence and glorify their God
and be of benefit to one another.

That is the Gospel of Jesus Christ as revealed to the Latter-day
Saints. That is the Gospel in which we delight. Salvation! Oh, the
joyful sound! We do not wish to condemn; we do not wish to injure; we
do not wish to curse; we do not wish to revile our enemies. We are glad
in the thought that even those who revile us, and persecute us, and say
all manner of evil against us falsely for Christ's sake, will some day
or other understand the truth as it is; and we hope, as instruments in
the hands of God, that we will peradventure be chosen to help them out
of darkness, out of despair and punishment, when they have paid their
dues, because the authority that God has revealed continues and abides.
It seals on earth and it is sealed in heaven. It does not depart with
the body. The men whom God has called in this generation to labor for
His cause, when they die and lay their bodies down, like their Great
Master will go into the spirit world where there are myriads of people
who need enlightenment--"Christians," pagans, heathens, all races, all
tribes, all tongues. The work of the servants of God is to them in the
spirit as well as to men in the flesh. They are to preach the Gospel to
every creature, and the sound thereof will go to the uttermost bounds
of the spiritual world as well as to the natural world; and every
immortal spirit, son or daughter of the great Eternal Father, will have
an opportunity to bow the knee and accept the truth.

{72}

Different Degrees of Glory.

But they will not all be saved in the same degree of glory. That would
be unjust. God is just as well as merciful. His mercy balances with His
justice, and His justice with His mercy. One will not rob the other.
There are eternal principles from which even He cannot swerve and still
be God. God must govern Himself by the eternal principles of right.
This He teaches to His children, and so far as we conform to that, so
far will be our power, our glory, our joy and our exaltation in worlds
to come. The Gospel is preached to men and women in the flesh; and
if they repent, and are baptized in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, by one having divine authority, and
receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of hands, as a gift of God to
enlighten their minds and guide them into all truth, and they abide in
it and are really baptized into Christ, then when Christ appears in
His glory they will be with Him, and be numbered as His jewels. They
will be "Christ's at His coming." They will have part in the first
resurrection. They will be clothed with glory, immortality and eternal
life. They will dwell in the presence of the Father and of the Son
forever. They will be crowned with the power of His might. Those who
belong to them, if also faithful, will share this glory with them--the
husband with the wife, the parents with the children. The beginning of
their glory will be the foundation of their family government, under
their Eternal Father, for ever and ever; and their increase in numbers,
in power, in might, in dominion, in intelligence, in everlasting
progress, in all that is good and beautiful and happifying, will have
no end. This is in the celestial glory--the glory that is typified by
the sun. Then there are others who receive not the Gospel of Christ in
the flesh, but afterwards receive it in the spirit; they will receive
a terrestrial glory, typified by the moon. There will be millions
of the heathen nations, who knew not God on the earth, but who will
receive the truth in the other world, and they will inherit a glory
of the kind that I have here briefly alluded to. Then there is a vast
number, which cannot be counted by mortal man, who will be thrust down
to punishment. Justice will claim its own. Some will be beaten by a few
stripes, and some by many stripes. Some will be forgiven in the next
world for sins that they did not repent of in this world, and others
may have to pay "the uttermost farthing." Eternal justice will deal out
to every soul that which should be his; for all shall be judged {73}
according to their works. But through the power of the atonement of our
Lord Jesus Christ, when they are willing to accept it and to conform
to the principles of eternal life, they will be brought out of their
punishment and sorrow, and they will be placed in a degree of glory
suited to their capacity and condition. That glory is called the glory
of the stars; and as one star differs from another star in glory, so
also will be their several conditions.

Eternal justice and eternal mercy will each operate in every individual
case, and a just and righteous judge will deal out that which belongs
to all. He will not judge as men do, by the sight of the eye and
the hearing of the ear; but He will judge according to justice and
righteousness and according to the motives and intents of the hearts
of the children of men. Men strive to do right sometimes and fail.
God will judge them accordingly. There are people born with certain
tendencies and proclivities; there are others who have environments
around them which almost impel them to do that which is evil. God
will comprehend all this, and judge accordingly. He will deal out to
every man as his works shall be, and according to the desires of his
heart and his efforts to do good or to do evil. He who wilfully does
evil will reap evil. There is an eternal law of compensation, which
God cannot turn aside and be God. Every tree will bring forth its own
fruit. Every seed will bear of its kind. "He that sows to the flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit
shall of the Spirit reap life eternal."

Liberality of the Gospel.

This, I think, is a very liberal Gospel. But we do not claim credit for
it, my friends. This was not invented by the boy Prophet Joseph Smith,
who was proclaimed an ignoramus, a fool, an idiot, a knave. No, he did
not invent this beautiful doctrine that I have been briefly proclaiming
this afternoon. It was revealed from on high. It came by the voice of
God from the eternal heavens. It is too good for a man to originate.
It is Godlike; it is Christlike; it is broad, beautiful, and grand. It
reaches the whole of the human race, from Adam, our father, down to the
last person born on this globe. The heathen, the "Christian," the Jew,
the pagan, the Mohamedan, the infidel, the skeptic, the agnostic, all
people, all races, all tongues, all tribes--all shall hear the Gospel.
Every ear shall tingle with the sound thereof. Some may say, how can
an ear tingle in the spirit? My friends, perhaps you do not know much
about these things that are {74} called spiritual. The spirit of man is
an entity, a personality, a substance. It is not a mere myth, a breath.
True, it is a more refined substance than that which composes our body,
so much so that we cannot comprehend it in our present condition.
But when the spirit goes out of the body it is an individual, in the
same shape and form as the body, because the body is conformed to the
spirit. Sometimes the spirit is temporarily conformed to the body in
deformed persons; but these are exceptional cases. The spirit of man
is a son of God, made in His image and likeness. Jesus was the express
likeness of the Father, and we are His brothers and sisters. He is the
oldest, "the beginning of the creation of God," "the first born of
every creature" in the spirit, and "the only begotten" in the flesh.
When the spirit leaves the body, there is an individual, capable of
progress, capable of hearing, capable of receiving or rejecting, an
individual with agency, with power to do good and power to do evil.
And these spirits will be gathered together in classes. Each spirit,
when it leaves the body, will gravitate to its proper place, just as
naturally as things gravitate on this globe towards the center thereof.
It will be so in the spiritual world; for earthly things are after
the pattern of heavenly things. Thus each individual will have an
opportunity, at some time, of hearing and receiving the truth. And,
thank God, we have the assurance that the time will come when the great
mass of the human family will cheerfully bow the knee to the Great
Eternal Father and accept Jesus Christ, the Elder Brother, as their
Redeemer. They will receive the Gospel in the spirit, if they did not
in the flesh; and then they will be judged according to their works.
The Father will find a place for them all, somewhere in His great
universe, where they can be happy, where they can fill the measure of
their creation, where they can progress forever, learn more and more,
become better, brighter and more glorious, and unite with Him in His
great and glorious purposes concerning His children.

This is the Gospel of Christ as we understand it. Now contrast that, my
dear friends, for a moment, with the religion that is commonly taught
in the Christian world by people who say that we are illiberal. What do
they tell us? "If you do not believe in Jesus Christ while you dwell in
the flesh, when you die you will go to hell." What is hell? "It is a
place of burning torment, where you will welter in misery so great that
no tongue can tell it, forever and forever, and there will be no end to
it." And some of them will tell you that God, before the foundations of
the earth, in the very {75} beginning, chose a few out of the rubbish
of nature to be saved and exalted to His divine glory, and the rest
were doomed to everlasting condemnation and ceaseless misery in flames
and torment with the devil and his angels. Which is the more liberal
doctrine of the two?

"Everlasting Punishment."

But what about this "everlasting punishment?" Does not the Bible teach
everlasting punishment? Yes. If I had time I would read something
from Section 19 of this Book of Doctrine and Covenants in regard to
that; but I will briefly allude to it. The Lord revealed to Joseph
Smith that "eternal punishment is God's punishment," because God is
eternal. The meaning of that is this: An eternal Being, having eternal
laws, has also eternal penalties; and those who will not obey the laws
must suffer the penalties. The penalty will abide forever, because
it is eternal; but a man will not suffer it forever. Each individual
will receive of that punishment that which eternal justice will mark
out as his due. To illustrate it in a simple way: Here we have a
penitentiary. Some men go in there for six months and when their time
expires they come out; but the penitentiary still abides. It is there
for all transgressors. Men go in there for a year, or two years, as the
case may be, and when they have served their term they come out; but
the penitentiary still remains. So with the judgments of our Eternal
Father. He is endless, eternal; His laws are eternal. His punishment
is eternal. But He is just, and He will give to all who disobey His
laws just that meed of eternal punishment which they ought to have,
and no more. They will be judged "according to their works." If they
are worthy of but few stripes, they will not have many; if they are
worthy of many, they will not get off with a few. If they ought to pay
"the uttermost farthing" without being forgiven, they will have to pay
it. If there are circumstances in their case which warrant forgiveness
after a certain amount of punishment, the Lord will forgive them and
deliver them.

Work in the Spirit World.

The organization of His Church is for the proclamation of the Gospel,
not only in the flesh, but also in the spirit. The Church on earth is
united with the Church behind the veil. The Prophet Joseph Smith, who
was martyred for the word of God and testimony of Jesus and who sealed
his testimony with his blood, and his brother Hyrum, opened the door
{76} of salvation to the spirit world for the last dispensation, as
Christ opened it for the time that He went there. Our Apostles, Elders
and brethren who have followed, who have laid down their lives for the
truth, who have been worn out in the service of God and in laboring
for the salvation of mankind, are also laboring there among the hosts
that sit in darkness. We who still remain in the flesh expect, when
our earthly work is done, to follow on; and the priesthood which
the Almighty has given us wherewith to labor for the uplifting and
salvation of mankind in the flesh, will be our authority and power when
we pass behind the veil and mingle with the spirits of the departed.
The Gospel will be preached to every creature, whether in the body or
out of the body, "the quick and the dead." Christ preached the Gospel
to those that were dead as well as to the quick, and we expect to
follow in His footsteps, according to His promise, "He that believeth
in me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than
these shall he do, because I go to the Father."

My friends, I have only just touched on the outer rim of this great
theme of salvation. Our Heavenly Father prepared the plan of salvation
before this earth rolled into being, before the cornerstones thereof
were laid, "when the morning stars sang together and all the sons of
God shouted for joy," and when Jesus, our Elder Brother, "the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world," was prepared for the sacrifice
to come in the meridian of time. And Lucifer, who was cast down with
his hosts, and who leads men astray, will not gain the victory. He
will not triumph over the Redeemer. Christ will "destroy death, and
him that hath the power of death, which is the devil;" and, as I have
read to you, He will redeem all that the Father hath placed in His
power--all His brothers and sisters. They in the spirit will be brought
out of darkness and punishment, and they will all reach some condition
in the places prepared of God. In the many mansions that there are in
the Father's kingdom they will all find a place, after they have paid
the penalty, where they can bow the knee to the Lord and be happy; for
though "Adam fell that men might be, men are that they may have joy."
God has created us to give us happiness and pleasure.

Cherish No Evil Feeling.

My brethren and sisters, let us take care that having received the
Gospel, we are led by the spirit thereof and are kind to one another,
and that we cherish the spirit of {77} kindness to the world, even
to those who may persecute us, and deride us, and say all manner of
evil against us falsely. Do not cherish the spirit of retaliation and
revenge in your hearts. "Vengeance is mine: I will repay, saith the
Lord." It is not for us to take vengeance. Let us entertain the kindest
feelings we can. Where it is appropriate, let us say as Jesus did,
"Father, forgive them; they know not what they do." Oh! I wish that I
could say that with regard to some of those who speak evil of us--that
they know not what they do; I would cherish in my heart a feeling of
sympathy and pity for them; but I know to the contrary. Many of them
know what they are doing; and when they speak falsely against us they
do it wilfully, with a knowledge that they are telling that which is
untrue. But even then we leave them in the hands of our Eternal Father;
for He will deal out a righteous judgment to all. We can afford to pity
them; for they will reap the consequences of their wicked acts, as sure
as the sun rises and sets, and as sure as justice will have its own.
Let us be kind to one another. Let us help one another on the road of
life, and be a comfort and a blessing to those with whom we associate,
instead of a curse. Put away all our evil feelings, our jealousies, our
faultfinding, our irritability, our disposition to say and do things
that are bad, and let the Spirit that comes from Christ our Redeemer
flow down into our souls and quicken and enlighten us. I know that that
Spirit is in the Church. I know it is a reality. I know this Church
is the Church of Christ, that He has established it, that He is with
it, and that His revelations and His Spirit are in it. I know it by
experience. I know what I am talking about, just as sure as I know that
I am standing here. I know this work will prosper and go on. Barriers
may be raised in its way; its enemies may come against it like a flood,
and weapons may be formed to attack it; but "no weapon that is formed
against it shall prosper, and the tongue that rises in judgment against
it God will condemn." The truth will be triumphant; the Gospel will
be preached to every creature; the honest will be gathered out; the
kingdom of our God will be built up; Christ our Redeemer will come; the
earth will be redeemed from sorrow, from sin, and from the power of
Satan, and Jesus will "reign in Mount Zion and Jerusalem, and before
His ancients gloriously," and a rich reward shall come to all those who
are faithful in Him.

May God help us to perform our part in this great and glorious work,
and may we obtain the crown in the kingdom of our Father, for Christ's
sake. Amen.

{78}



MORMONISM JUDGED BY ITS EFFECTS.

By Elder C. W. Penrose, In Millennial Star, 1866.

As every tree is known by its fruits, so every principle may be known
by its influences, and every system by its effects. "Mormonism" has
been introduced into the world upwards of thirty-six years; and
although no fair opportunity has been granted, for the development of
its influences, yet by its inherent vitality, it has forced itself into
notice and power; and its effects have been sufficiently manifested, to
enable us to judge the nature of the cause that produced them.

First, let us examine the effects produced upon the minds of those who
embrace "Mormonism." One of the promises held out by its advocates,
is that those who obey its precepts shall "come to a knowledge of the
truth." Now this is a blessing which professing Christians of modern
times are sadly deficient of. They believe, they hope, they desire,
but do not come to any definite knowledge in relation to God and their
position before him. But those who have embraced "Mormonism," in every
place where you meet them, whether in Britain, France, Switzerland,
Germany, Scandinavia, Africa, India, America, or the islands of the
sea, all testify that they know they have embraced the truth, that
their sins are remitted, and that they are accepted of God, and brought
into communion with Him. Doubt has fled from them, and faith has grown
into knowledge.

Another effect of "Mormonism" is, that it abolishes the fear of death.
All its faithful adherents will testify that the terror of death has
entirely departed from them. The great mass of mankind are haunted
with a dread of entering upon that "undiscovered country, from whose
bourne no traveler returns." Even to the most pious members of the
various "Christian" sects, there is something awful and terrible in
death. This fear brings the whole world into bondage; but "Mormonism"
bringing knowledge to the mind, liberates it from doubt and fear, and
establishes the soul in "the liberty of the Gospel."

"Mormonism" creates or induces faith in the human soul. This faith is
exhibited practically. When the "Mormons" are sick, they send for the
Elders of the Church, who anoint {79} them with oil, and lay their
hands upon them, believing in the promise of God that "the prayer
of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise them up." In
thousands of instances their faith has been effectual; disease has fled
before it; the eyes of the blind have been opened, the tongue of the
dumb has been unloosed, the ears of the deaf have been unstopped, the
lame man has "leaped like the hare," and the spirit of life, invoked
by the power of faith, has forced the "King of Terrors" to relax
his grasp and retire from his intended victim. Scores of thousands
of the "Mormons" have braved the perils of the treacherous sea, and
encountered the dangers of the wild prairies, and the mountain heights,
in obedience to the commandment of God, because of their faith in
His promises to them. Few of them would have left the homes of their
forefathers, but for this faith. Numbers of them had a natural and
intense dread of the briny deep, until "Mormonism" animated them with
faith to go anywhere, or do anything that God commanded them, relying
upon His guidance and protection. By the faith with which "Mormonism"
has inspired them, the Elders of Israel have gone forth, "without purse
or scrip," to the four quarters of the globe, preaching the Gospel of
Life and Salvation, looking to God for their daily support, and for
wisdom to acquire a knowledge of languages, and customs, and nations,
and men; exhibiting in their labors, a faith unparalleled in the
history of the world. If believing the promises of God were "accounted
for righteousness" in Abraham, so it will be in the Saints of this
dispensation, who have proved by their faith and their works, that they
are in very deed "the children of Abraham."

"Mormonism" also produces peace of mind in all who are faithful to its
principles. That inestimable boon for which millions seek in vain,
is found in "Mormonism." It is one of its pre-eminent effects. The
soul, freed from its load of long-accumulated guilt, lifted up from
the depths of fear and doubt, into a perfect consciousness of its
freedom, lit up by the lamp of the spirit of truth, strengthened by a
full knowledge of its acceptance with God, feels a soft, gentle calm
gathering around it like a heavenly halo, centering to its inmost
depths, and establishing therein "the peace of God which passeth all
understanding."

The result of these several effects of "Mormonism," united upon the
mind, is the grand desideratum of humanity, viz., happiness. The
pursuit of happiness is the great motive power of all exertion. The
"Mormons" we make bold to say, are the happiest people to be found
upon the face of the earth. {80} Living without the fear of death,
believing that there is no phase of existence more important than the
present, they work to enjoy life today, having no dread of tomorrow.
Understanding through the teachings of "Mormonism" that all things in
the universe which are calculated to impart joy, are ordained of God
for His creatures, they seek lawfully to obtain them, and to use them
without abusing them. They can rejoice in the midst of the most trying
circumstances. While misrepresented, ridiculed, persecuted, abused, and
deprived of their just rights, they richly enjoy the happiness which
their enemies ineffectually strive to obtain. The absence of sadness
and grief from their countenances is so noticeable, that the pious,
long faced, "Miserable sinners" of the various sects declare, with
uplifted eyes that "the Mormons have no religion in them." Happiness
fills their hearts, gladness smiles upon their faces, and joy sparkles
in their eyes.

"Mormonism" has the power of uniting its adherents in a manner
very different and far superior to any other system in the world.
The unity of the "Mormons" is noticed and acknowledged by their
bitterest enemies, while, at the same time, the disunion among all
other religious bodies, and political organizations, is admitted and
deplored. There is a spirit in "Mormonism," which leads its followers
into unity of sentiment, belief and action. No matter how varied
their opinions before; no matter how diverse their sentiments, when
they embrace "Mormonism," they are "all baptized by one spirit into
one body;" they have "one Lord, one faith, and one baptism," and "one
hope of their calling." They are inspired with a desire to gather from
all the countries of the earth to one place, and to act in concert
together, to accomplish one object, viz., to build up the universal
kingdom of the one God. This power of unity is so great, that all the
efforts made by its opponents to dissolve or weaken it, are perfectly
futile, and in fact only serve to defeat their intended object,
rendering its unity more compact, and consequently its strength more
potent and enduring.

"Mormonism" is the pioneer of intelligence. Mark the path of its
travel, whether by its own free will, marching forth to fight its way
among the nations, or driven out from the haunts of men, staining
its track with its own blood; wherever it has paused for a season,
or made a permanent location, newspapers, schools, organizations for
improvement, etc., start into life and flourish. It is a friend to all
true art and real science, and wars against nothing but that which
debases and destroys.

{81} "Mormonism" has taken many thousands of poor, honest people,
who were miserably dragging out their almost worthless existence,
in poverty and servitude, and placed them in a position to become
independent, free and comfortable, with an object in life to stimulate
them to virtuous and intelligent action. It has transplanted them from
the over-crowded, badly-governed, and vice-reeking countries of the
Old World, into the virgin soil, the pure atmosphere, and the free
institutions of the New World, and that in a new part, where there is
room to move, and where the corruptions of modern civilization find no
element on which to flourish. It has given them an inheritance upon the
earth, a spot they can call their own, and bequeath to their children,
and it has given them a voice in all affairs which concern their well
being and progress. It will continue the good work of emancipation, and
bring joy and gladness to the honest among the down trodden millions.

"Mormonism" has solved the great problem of the social evil, and has
shown the world how a community can exist and thrive, in the nineteenth
century, without a "loathsome ulcer" of female prostitution. It has
given a practical answer to the difficult question of "adequate female
employment," and shown how every woman can have opportunity to "fill
the measure of her creation," and become an honorable wife and happy
mother, instead of pining in single misery, toiling for a scanty meal,
or wasting a short and shameful life, in pandering to the filthy lusts
of the worst men.

"Mormonism" has planted itself in a spot given up by all the world
to the solitude of barbarism, and has developed the sudden wealth of
a vast region supposed to be barren and worthless. Its effects may
be seen in the fruitful fields, the lovely orchards, the tasteful
dwellings, the handsome stores, the stately public building,
tabernacles and school houses, the pleasant shade trees, the sweet
scented flowers, and the life bearing water courses, and also may be
heard in the hum of industry, the stir of trade, and melody of the
song of praise, and the harmony of musical instruments, in more than a
hundred towns and cities, where nineteen years ago not a single human
habitation could be seen, save the rude wick-e-up of the wandering
Indian, nor a sound of human life could be heard except the horrid yell
of the red man, shrieking through the affrighted air, and awakening
the startled echoes in the stillness of the mountains. Its effects may
be seen in the order, peace, unity, sobriety, virtue, intelligence,
faith, fortitude, wealth, and happiness of its followers, the most {82}
law-abiding, God-fearing, truth-loving and practical people upon the
face of the earth.

Are not the fruits borne by the tree of "Mormonism," in the short space
of thirty-six years from the planting of the seed, good, sound and
abundant? And is not every tree known by its fruits?

"Mormonism" is a stem planted by the hand of the Lord; watered by
"the blood of Saints and of Prophets;" it flourishes gloriously. Its
roots are striking deeper every day, and its thriftly branches shoot
forth vigorously. The blasts of hell cannot wither it; the fire of the
world's wrath cannot touch it; but while "every tree that the Father
has not planted shall be rooted up," this "plant of renown," which is
the "kingdom of heaven," growing up on the face of the earth, shall
stretch out its mighty boughs, and yield forth its precious fruit, till
the whole earth reposes under its shelter, and the heavenly ones shall
"lodge in the branches thereof."

    "_We have been driven time after time, and that without cause;
    and smitten again and again, and that without provocation; until
    we have proved the world with kindness, and the world has proved
    us, that we have no designs against any man or set of men; that we
    injure no man; that we are peaceable with all men, minding our own
    business, and our business only_."

    --_Joseph Smith, September, 1, 1838_.

{83}



The "Reorganized" Church vs. Salvation For the Dead.

By Joseph F. Smith, Jr.

    "And Saviors shall come up on Mount Zion to judge the Mount of Esau
    and the Kingdom shall be the Lords." Obadiah, 21st verse.

The so-called "Reorganized" church, which is so bitter in its
antagonism towards the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has
claimed from its beginning to be teaching and practicing the doctrines
of the Gospel as they were revealed from God through the Prophet Joseph
Smith. Its officers declare that they are walking in the footsteps
of the martyred Seer; hewing closely to the line, and observing in
all things the commandments which were given from God through his
instrumentality, without variation, change, or loss of power from all
that pertains to the salvation of the human family in this dispensation
of the fullness of times.

Their foundation is built upon the absurd and misty claim that the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which was established
April 6, 1830, through the labors of Joseph Smith the Prophet and the
will of God, was "rejected with its dead for transgression of its
members," and that the "Reorganized" church is a "new organization" [1]
which God raised up to succeed the original--but as they would have us
believe, "rejected"--Church.

It is not my purpose to discuss the foolish question of the "rejection
of the Church," but to examine the Reorganite position in regard to
salvation for the dead; and to show their lack of harmony with the
teachings of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints pertaining
to the dead, as those teachings have been revealed through the
latter-day Prophet.

It stands to reason that if the Lord rejected His Church _with its
dead_ because of transgression, or any other cause {84} whatever, that
He would not raise up a substitute church to carry on His work on earth
and still keep the dead--who could in no wise be held responsible
for the rejection--in suspension, and deny to them the privilege of
receiving the ordinances of the Gospel by proxy according to the
revealed plan of God as it was ordained from before the foundations of
the world were laid, as a means of salvation to those who die without
a knowledge of the Gospel. To any reasonable mind this truth would
need no argument. Yet the "Reorganized" church declares that the Lord
did this very thing; and in the light of the revelations given to the
Prophet Joseph as well as those in the ancient Scriptures, which bear
on this subject of salvation for the dead, their declaration is fatal
to their organization; it stamps it as fraudulent and their officers as
impostors. A church without salvation for the dead, according to the
revealed will of God to the Prophet Joseph Smith, cannot be the Church
of Christ.

When the Angel Moroni appeared to Joseph Smith on the night of
September 21, 1823, he imparted to the youthful Seer many truths of the
greatest importance pertaining to the restoration of the Gospel and the
establishment of the Church which, the angel said, was about to take
place. These instructions were of such weight that they were repeated
twice more that night and again the following day, in order that this
young man, upon whose shoulders the burden of the latter day work
should rest, might be sufficiently impressed with the greatness and
importance of his mission. Among the instructions given by the angel
at this time, the doctrine of salvation for the dead had an important
part. This heavenly messenger said that the prophecy of Malachi the
Prophet was about to be fulfilled, and he quoted the fourth chapter of
Malachi, but with this variation:

    "For, behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all
    the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall burn as stubble;
    for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of hosts, that
    it shall leave them neither root nor branch. * * * Behold, I will
    reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the prophet,
    before the coming of that great and dreadful day of the Lord. And
    he shall plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to
    their fathers, and the hearts of the children shall turn to their
    fathers; if it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted
    at his coming." (History of the Church, Vol. I, page 12.)

At that time the full meaning and glory and significance of this
instruction were not understood by the Prophet, although it made a deep
impression on his mind. On the 3d day of April, 1836, it was fulfilled,
for Elijah the Prophet {85} appeared in the Kirtland Temple to Joseph
Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and conferred upon them this Priesthood and
the keys of the salvation for the dead stating that--

    "Behold the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth
    of Malachi, testifying that he (Elijah) should be sent before the
    great and dreadful day of the Lord come. To turn the hearts of the
    fathers to the children, and the children to their fathers, lest
    the whole earth be smitten with a curse. Therefore the keys of this
    dispensation are committed into your hands, and by this ye may know
    that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the
    doors." (Doc. and Cov. 110: 13-16. History of "Reorganized" Church,
    Vol. 2, page 47.)

Following the bestowal of this Priesthood with its keys, the spirit
of salvation for the dead was poured out in abundance upon the heads
of the Prophet and his people whose hearts began to turn toward their
dead fathers. After the Church settled in Nauvoo, baptism for the dead
was instituted, the Lord, at first, permitting the ordinance to be
performed in the Mississippi river, but later revealing to the Saints
that the proper place for this and other rites for the salvation of
the dead, must be performed in a Temple built purposely for such
ordinances, and that only in times of their extreme poverty could
these ordinances be performed elsewhere by His people. Such a temple
the Saints were commanded to build, and on the 21st of November, 1841,
baptisms for the dead, which had been discontinued in the river at
Nauvoo by command of God, October 3, 1841, were resumed in the font of
the Lord's House, which had been dedicated for that purpose. [2] These
ordinances continued to be performed until the Temple was completed and
the Saints were driven from Nauvoo. The spirit of Elijah's work, which
had rested so mightily upon the Prophet Joseph, continued with Brigham
Young and the "Mormon" people during their travels in the wilderness,
and when they arrived in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, the first
commandment to them from the Lord, was to build a Temple to His name,
where the ordinances of salvation for the living and for the dead could
be performed. This work was done as speedily as possible and from that
day to the present the spirit of Temple building and of Temple work for
the salvation of mankind has continued with the Church.

This action on the part of the Church under the leadership of the
successors of Joseph Smith is in harmony with the Scriptures and the
teachings and commandments given to the {86} Prophet. He declared that
baptism for the dead--the opening of the prison house to them that sit
in darkness, and the proclamation of liberty to the captives--was the
most glorious of all subjects belonging to the everlasting Gospel,
and so greatly was he wrought upon by this work that the subject
occupied his mind almost constantly before his death. Moreover, a
short time before his martyrdom, the Prophet bestowed upon the Twelve
Apostles--who constitute the second quorum in the Church--all the keys
and all the ordinances and Priesthood necessary for them to hold in
order to carry on this great and glorious work of universal salvation.

That the Twelve did receive these keys and powers, we learn from the
following quotations from the Times and Seasons. Orson Hyde, one of
that quorum, said:

    "Before I went east on the 4th of April (1844) last, we were in
    council with Brother Joseph almost every day for weeks, said
    Brother Joseph in one of those councils, there is something going
    to happen; I don't know what it is, but the Lord bids me to hasten
    and give you your endowment before the Temple is finished. He
    conducted us through every ordinance of the Holy Priesthood, and
    when he had gone through with all the ordinances he rejoiced very
    much, and said, now if they kill me you have got all the keys,
    and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others, and
    the hosts of Satan will not be able to tear down the Kingdom as
    fast as you will be able to build it up; and now, said he, on your
    shoulders will the responsibility of leading this people rest."
    (Times and Seasons, Vol. 5, page 651.)

This testimony is corroborated by the testimony of Elder Wilford
Woodruff, which is found in the same volume, page 698, wherein he says:

    "And when they (the Twelve) received their endowment, and actually
    the keys of the Kingdom of God, and oracles of God, keys of
    revelation, and the pattern of heavenly things; and thus addressing
    the Twelve (Joseph) exclaimed, 'Upon your shoulders the Kingdom
    rests, and you must round up your shoulders and bear it, for I have
    had to do it until now.'"

Sister Bathsheba W. Smith, wife of George A. Smith, one of the Twelve
to whom these keys were given, was present in the council meetings
above referred to, and in an affidavit, dated November 19, 1903, says:

    "In the year 1844, a short time before the death of the Prophet
    Joseph Smith, it was my privilege to attend a regular prayer circle
    meeting in the upper room over the Prophet's store. There were
    present at this meeting most of the Twelve Apostles, their wives
    and a number of other prominent brethren and their wives. On that
    occasion the Prophet arose and spoke at great length, and during
    his remarks I heard him say that he had conferred on the heads of
    {87} the Twelve Apostles all the keys and powers pertaining to the
    Priesthood, and that upon the heads of the Twelve Apostles the
    burden of the Kingdom rested, and that they would have to carry it."

Having shown the consistency of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints with regard to the doctrine of salvation for the
dead; and having shown that the keys of this work, and all other keys
pertaining to the salvation of mankind have continued with the Church,
we will now consider the attitude of the "Reorganization" in relation
to this grand and eternal principle of the redemption of the dead.

At first the founders of the "Reorganized" church appeared to favor
it and declared that when the "Reorganization" was established that
this principle would be practiced, for as the "rejection of the church
produced an effect on the dead," said they, "as well as on the living,
so will the reorganization." [3] But when the "reorganization" took
place the change that was promised in regard to the dead was not
fulfilled, and since that time to the present day--over forty-five
years--baptism for the dead, Temple building and Temple work, have
never been, by that organization, practiced or entertained. In fact
they have turned about face and have rejected peremptorily the doctrine
of baptism for the dead and now declare that _it is not binding on
them_.

In a resolution adopted by that church, April 9, 1886, the following
startling declaration was made:

    "That as to the alleged 'Temple building and ceremonial endowments
    therein,' that we know of no Temple building, except as edifices
    wherein to worship God, and no endowment except the endowment of
    the Holy Spirit of the kind experienced by the early saints on
    Pentecost day.

    "'Baptism for the dead' referred to belongs to those local
    questions of which the body has said by resolution:

    "'That the commandments of a local character, given to the first
    organization of the church are binding on the Reorganization only
    so far as they are either reiterated or referred to as binding by
    commandment to this church.' And that principle has neither been
    reiterated nor referred to as a commandment." [4]

In February, 1904, the president of that "organization" declared that
baptism for the dead was a _permissive rite_, [5] and that it was
taken from the Church, "and if subsequently it was to be engaged in,"
said he, "and enjoyed by the same people, it must be restored again
by revelation and command, and could not be assumed as being held
over by suffrance. We do not {88} know of any revelation or command
authoritatively promulgated renewing the privilege."

His statement is a flat acknowledgment that he does not hold the keys
of this work and that they can only be received by revelation. That
he does not hold the keys is true. That he did not receive them from
his father he admits, [6] and William Marks, William W. Blair and
Zenas H. Gurley, who "ordained" him to his office of president of the
"Reorganized" church, never held them. They could only be obtained
from the Prophet Joseph Smith, and from him, as has been shown, the
Twelve received them in 1844. "Young Joseph" might truthfully have gone
further and declared that if the privilege was taken away, before it
could again be practiced with authority and power that the keys of the
Priesthood which were held by Elijah would again have to be restored.
His statement is an unqualified admission that the work of Elijah was
performed in vain. He challenges that prophet's statement, _that the
time had fully come_. He acknowledges that, in spite of all the efforts
of the "Reorganization" in the attempt to save souls, the whole earth
is in danger of being "_smitten with a curse_" and "_utterly wasted_"
at the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, _which is
"near, even at the doors_." If this statement of the president of the
"Reorganized" church is true, then the members of his church stand in
jeopardy every hour; darkness covers the face of the earth; there is no
salvation for the children of men; the word of the Lord has failed, and
destruction awaits the earth and her inhabitants.

In declaring that baptism for the dead was a "_permissive rite_" he
shows a willful lack of understanding pertaining to the great eternal
plan of salvation which was revealed through his Prophet father. In
declaring that baptism was a local commandment to the Saints at Nauvoo,
_not binding on the members of the "Reorganization_" the members of
his church acknowledge that the hand of Jehovah is not guiding them;
that they are floundering in the mire of unbelief and ignorance. They
make light of one of the "_most glorious subjects belonging to the
everlasting Gospel_."

Yes, the authorities of the "Reorganized" church have declared by
conference resolution that baptism for the dead _is {89} not binding_
on them because it was a _local commandment_, and "_has never been
reiterated nor referred to as a commandment_!"

Judged by the Reorganite standards of faith and doctrine will
this statement bear the light of investigation? Baptism a _local
commandment, not binding on the Saints_! "To the law and the
testimony," said Isaiah, "if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them."

In section 128 of the Doctrine and Covenants (sec. CX Reorganite
edition), verse 17, in a revelation [7] to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we
read the following:

    "I will give you a quotation from one of the Prophets, who had his
    eye fixed on the restoration of the priesthood, the glories to be
    revealed in the last days, and in an especial manner this _most
    glorious of all subjects belonging to the everlasting gospel_,
    viz.: the baptism for the dead; for Malachi says, last chapter,
    verses 5, 6, 'Behold I will send you Elijah the prophet, before
    the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall
    turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the
    children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a
    curse.'"

Not only is the Priesthood which was revealed by Elijah the Prophet,
pertaining to the "most glorious of all subjects belonging to the
everlasting Gospel," but it is of the most importance, for the Prophet
Joseph says:

    "The _greatest responsibility_ in this world that God has laid upon
    us, is to _seek after our dead_. The apostle says they without us
    cannot be made perfect. Now I will speak of them: I say to you,
    Paul, you cannot be perfect without us; It is necessary that those
    who have gone before, and those who come after us should have
    salvation in common with us, and thus hath God made it _obligatory_
    to man. Hence God said he would send Elijah." (Times and Seasons,
    6: 616.)

Moreover, at the conference of the Church held October 3, 1841, he
presented,

    "Baptism for the dead as the only way that men can appear as
    saviors on Mount Zion. The proclamation of the first principles of
    the Gospel was a means of salvation to men individually, and it was
    the truth, not men, that saved them; but men by actively engaging
    in rites of salvation _substitutionally_, become instrumental in
    bringing _multitudes of their kin_ into the kingdom of God. * * *
    There is {90} a way to release the spirit of the dead; that is by
    the power and authority of the Priesthood--by binding and loosing
    on earth.

    "This doctrine appears glorious inasmuch as it exhibits the
    greatness of divine compassion, and benevolence in the extent of
    the plan of human salvation. This glorious truth is well calculated
    to enlarge the understanding, and to sustain the soul under
    troubles, difficulties, and distresses. * * *

    "This doctrine, he said, presents in a clear light the wisdom and
    mercy of God, in preparing an ordinance for the salvation of the
    dead, being baptized by proxy, their names recorded in heaven, and
    they judged according to the deeds done in the body. _This doctrine
    was the burden of the Scriptures. Those Saints who neglect it, in
    behalf of their deceased relatives, do it at the peril of their
    own salvation_." (Times and Seasons, Vol. 2, pages 577-578, also
    History of "Reorganized" Church, Vol. 2, pages 545-546.)

Now, whom shall we believe? The "Reorganized" church that has rejected
baptism for the dead, declaring it to be a _local commandment not
binding on them_, or the Prophet Joseph Smith who declares that it is
the burden of the Scriptures, and that if we neglect it it is at the
peril of our own salvation?

The significance of this principle is even more emphatically expressed
in section 128 of the Doctrine and Covenants (CX Reorganite edition).
Let me quote:

    Verse 5. "You may think this order of things to be very particular,
    but let me tell you, that they are only to answer the will of
    God, by conforming to the ordinance and preparation that the Lord
    ordained and prepared before the foundation of the world, for the
    salvation of the dead, _who should die without a knowledge of the
    Gospel_."

    Verse 8. "For out of the books shall your dead be judged, according
    to their own works, whether they themselves have attended to the
    ordinances in their own _propria persona_ or by means of their own
    agents, according to the ordinance which God has prepared for their
    salvation from before the foundation of the world, according to the
    records which they have kept concerning their dead."

    Verse 15. "And now, my dearly beloved brethren and sisters, let
    me assure you that these are principles, in relation to the dead
    and the living, that cannot be lightly passed over, as pertaining
    to our salvation, for their salvation is necessary and essential
    to our salvation, as Paul says concerning the fathers, 'that they
    without us cannot be made perfect, neither can we without our dead
    be made perfect.'"

    Verse 18. "It is sufficient to know * * * that the earth will be
    smitten with a curse, unless there is a welding link of some kind
    or other, between the fathers and the children, upon some subject
    or other, and behold what is that subject? It is the baptism for
    the dead. For we without them cannot be made perfect; neither can
    they without us be made perfect. Neither can they nor we be made
    perfect without those who have died in the Gospel also; for it is
    necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fullness
    of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that
    a whole and complete and perfect union and welding together of
    dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place,
    and be revealed, from the days of Adam even to the present time;
    and not {91} only this, but those things which never have been
    revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept
    hid from the wise and prudent shall be revealed unto babes and
    sucklings in this the dispensation of the fullness of times."

From the original manuscript history of the Prophet Joseph Smith, now
in the Historian's office, Salt Lake City, I obtain the following under
date of January 20, 1844:

    "Preached at the southwest corner of the Temple to several thousand
    people, although the weather was somewhat unpleasant. My subject
    was the sealing of the hearts of the fathers to the children, and
    the hearts of the children to the fathers."

Of this discourse a synopsis was reported by Elder Wilford Woodruff,
from which the Prophet Joseph records the following in that history:

    "The Bible says, 'I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the
    coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord; and he shall turn
    the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the
    children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a
    curse.'

    "Now, the word _turn_ here should be translated _bind_, or seal.
    But what is the object of this important mission? or how is it to
    be fulfilled? The keys are to be delivered, the spirit of Elijah
    is to come, the Gospel to be established, the Saints of God to be
    gathered, Zion built up, and the Saints to come up as saviors on
    Mount Zion.

    "But how are they to become saviors on Mount Zion? By building
    their temples, erecting their baptismal fonts, and going forth and
    receiving all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings,
    anointings, ordinations, and sealing powers upon their head, in
    behalf of all their progenitors, who are dead, and redeem them
    that they may come forth in the first resurrection and be exalted
    to thrones of glory with them; and herein is the chain that binds
    the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the
    fathers, which fulfills the mission of Elijah. And I would to God
    that this Temple was now done, that we might go into it, and go to
    work and improve our time, and make use of the seals while they are
    on earth.

    "_The Saints have not too much time to save and redeem their dead_,
    and gather together their living relatives, that they may be saved
    also, _before the earth will be smitten_, and the consummation
    decreed falls upon the world.

    "I would advise all the Saints to go to with their might and gather
    together all their living relatives to this place, that they may
    be sealed and saved, that they may be prepared against the day
    that the destroying angel goes forth; and if the _whole Church_
    should go to _with all their might to save their dead_, seal their
    posterity, and gather their living friends, and spend none of their
    time in behalf of the world, _they would hardly get through before
    night would come when no man can work_."

On the 12th of May, 1844, the Prophet Joseph said:

    "It is not only necessary that you should be baptized for your
    dead, but you will have to go through all the ordinances for them,
    same as you have gone through to save yourselves. There will be
    144,000 {92} saviors on Mount Zion, and with them an innumerable
    host that no man can count."

We learn from the foregoing quotations the following important facts
pertaining to the salvation of the dead:

    1. Salvation in behalf of the dead is the binding or sealing of the
    hearts of the fathers and the children, the welding link. (Doc. and
    Cov., 128: 18, Reorganite edition CX: 18.)

    2. It is the most glorious subject belonging to the everlasting
    Gospel. (Doc. and Cov., 128: 17, Reorganite edition CX: 17.)

    3. It is the greatest responsibility in this world that God has
    laid upon us--to seek after our dead. (Times and Seasons, Vol. 6,
    page 616.)

    4. It is obligatory to man. (Times and Seasons, Vol. 6, page 616.)

    5. Without it the whole earth and its inhabitants would be smitten
    with a curse. (Malachi 4: 6. Doc. and Cov. 128: 18, Reorganite
    edition, CX: 18.)

    6. It is an eternal doctrine prepared before the foundation of the
    world. (Doc. and Cov. 128: 5, 8, 18, Reorganite edition CX: 5, 8,
    18.)

    7. It is the burden of the Scriptures. (Times and Seasons, Vol. 2,
    page 578, Reorganite church history, Vol. 2, page 546.)

    8. If we neglect it it is at the peril of our own salvation. (Times
    and Seasons, Vol. 2, page 578, Reorganite church history, Vol. 2,
    page 546.)

    9. Through it we become saviors on Mount Zion, and may save
    multitudes of our kin. (Times and Seasons, Vol. 2, page 577,
    Reorganite church history, Vol. 2, page 545.)

    10. We without our dead and our dead without us cannot be saved
    with a perfect salvation. (Doc. and Cov. 128: 18, Reorganite
    edition CX: 18.)

    11. We cannot lightly pass this doctrine over as pertaining to our
    salvation. (Doc and Cov. 128: 15, Reorganite edition CX: 15.)

    12. The time granted to the Saints to redeem their dead and gather
    and seal their living relatives before the earth shall be smitten
    with a curse, is none too long." (History of Joseph Smith, January
    20, 1844.)

Now, my Reorganite friends, in the face of this how dare you presume
to circumscribe, limit and profane this doctrine of salvation for
the dead? Why do you call this eternal and most glorious principle a
"_permissive rite_," a "_local commandment_?" and declare before God
that _it is not binding on you_? God has declared it to be ordained
before the foundations of the world were laid for the salvation of the
dead who die without a knowledge of the Gospel--an eternal principle,
the burden of the Scriptures, obligatory to man. Are you in harmony
with the word of God? Were your leaders inspired to declare in the
face of Jehovah's commands that this eternal principle was a "_local
commandment_" not given to _them_ as a _commandment_? Binding only
on the Saints at Nauvoo? Do you not fear and tremble for your own
salvation in neglecting {93} the salvation of your dead? If the Jews
who lived in the days of Christ will have to answer for "all the
righteous blood shed upon the earth from the blood of righteous Abel
unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias," because they neglected
the salvation of their dead as well as their own salvation, pray tell,
what will your punishment be? (See Times and Seasons, Vol. 3, pages
760-761.) Remember that _you_ without _your dead_ cannot be made
perfect.

Confronted by this evidence, for you to declare that your leaders are
inspired and that yours is the Church of Christ, is most preposterous!

That the salvation of the dead is a Bible doctrine practiced by the
ancient Saints, we learn from the writings of Peter (I Peter 3: 18-20)
and Paul (I Cor. 15: 29), and the Revelator John (Rev. 22: 12). Isaiah
prophesied of it (Is. 42: 6, 7 and 61: 1, 2), and our Redeemer taught
it to the Jews (John 5: 28, 29), not as a _local commandment_, but as
an eternal Truth and a principle of the greatest importance to the
whole human family. And for that reason "Christ also hath suffered for
sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put
to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit, by which also he
went and preached (not in vain) unto the spirits in prison."

The keys of the Priesthood belong to the presiding officer of the
Church and must be held in order that the ordinances of a perfect
salvation may be administered to the Saints and in behalf of the dead.
The keys of the Priesthood could only be received from the one who held
them, the Prophet Joseph Smith, who received them from the heavens. Any
man claiming to be the President of the High Priesthood without these
keys is an imposter. We have been given a key by which the impostor may
be detected, for we have the word of the Lord that,

    "The great and grand secret of the whole matter, and the _summum
    bonum_ of the whole subject that is lying before us, consists in
    obtaining the power of the Holy Priesthood. For him to whom these
    keys are given there is _no difficulty_ in obtaining a knowledge
    of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men, both
    as well for the dead as for the living." (Doc. and Cov. 128: 11,
    Reorganite edition CX: 11.)

This declaration from the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith is most
explicit. We may ask: Has the president of the 'Reorganized' church
obtained this Priesthood? No, he has not! Then there is no wonder that
he cannot obtain "_knowledge of the facts_ in relation to the salvation
of the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the living."
{94} If he had obtained the keys would it be possible for him to lead
his people for more than forty-five years without a _knowledge_ of this
power which the Lord through the Prophet declares _is not difficult
for him who holds the keys and the powers of the Holy Priesthood_, and
which is the "sealing and binding power, and in one sense of the word
the keys of the kingdom which consists in the keys of knowledge?" If
he held these keys would it be possible that this grand and glorious
principle would have been neglected for so long a time when his father
the Prophet declared that in this day there was "not too much time to
save and redeem" the dead and gather the living relatives that they
also may be saved, before the consummation decreed falls upon the
world? Would it be possible, if he held these keys, for him to declare
that this doctrine was a _local commandment_, a _permissive rite_, not
binding on the Saints? Verily No!

The Lord declared in 1842, that He was about to restore to earth many
things pertaining to the Priesthood (Doc. and Cov. 127: 5, Reorganite
edition CIX: 5), and that only in Temples could the fullness of the
Priesthood be restored (Doc. and Cov. 124: 28, Reorganite edition CVII:
10). Did the word of the Lord fail? Did the Lord make a mistake? If the
contention of the "Reorganized" church is true, He did. But Latter-day
Saints know better. On our part we will accept the word of the Lord.

Since the "Reorganized" church does not build Temples, and knows of
"no temple building except as edifices wherein to worship God and
no endowment except the endowment of the Holy Spirit of the kind
experienced by the early Saints on Pentecost day," it is to be expected
that their president should be ignorant of the "fullness of the
Priesthood" and therefore experience great "_difficulty_ in obtaining
knowledge." If the elders of that church had read in the CVII section
of their Doctrine and Covenants (L. D. S. edition 124: 39-42) they
would have discovered that the doctrine of "ceremonial endowments" is
there taught most plainly:

    "Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and
    your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn
    assemblies, and your memorials for your sacrifices, by the sons
    of Levi, and for your oracles in your most holy places, wherein
    you receive conversations, and your statutes and judgments, for
    the beginning of the revelations and foundation of Zion, and for
    the glory, honor and endowment of all her municipals, are ordained
    by the ordinances of my holy house, which my people are always
    commanded to build unto my holy name.

    "And verily I say unto you, let this house (Nauvoo Temple) be {95}
    built unto my name, that I may _reveal mine ordinances therein_,
    unto my people; for I deign to reveal unto my Church, things which
    have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world; things
    that pertain to the dispensation of the fullness of times; and _I
    will show unto my servant Joseph all things_ pertaining to this
    house and _the Priesthood thereof_."

Now, if all the foregoing passages are true--and they must be if Joseph
Smith was a Prophet of God, which he was--then these things pertaining
to the Priesthood were revealed to him; and salvation for the dead
is just as binding on us and just as important as salvation for the
living. One depends upon the other, and they are binding on all the
children of men. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints cannot
teach one without the other, for they are inseparable. A house divided
against itself cannot stand.

Repent, therefore, and receive the Gospel, save yourselves with your
dead by becoming saviors on Mount Zion, before the consummation decreed
falls upon the earth; and by hearkening to these things, you will not
be "smitten with a curse", nor "utterly wasted" when the dreadful day
of the Lord does come.

    "Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a cause? Go forward and
    not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to the victory! Let
    your hearts rejoice and be exceedingly glad. Let the earth break
    forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of eternal
    praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained before the world
    was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison;
    for the prisoner shall go free!" (Doc and Cov. 128: 22, Reorganite
    Doc. and Cov. 110: 22.)

An Editorial From the Times and Seasons Written by the Prophet
Joseph Smith.

    The great designs of God in relation to the salvation of the human
    family are very little understood by the professedly wise and
    intelligent generation in which we live; various and conflicting
    are the opinions of men concerning the plan of salvation; the
    requisitions of the Almighty; the necessary preparations for
    heaven; the state and condition of departed spirits; and the
    happiness, or misery that is consequent upon the practice of
    righteousness and iniquity according to their several notions of
    virtue, and vice. The Mussulman condemns the heathen, the Jew and
    the Christian, and the whole world of mankind that rejects his
    Koran as infidels, and consigns the whole of them to perdition.
    The Jew believes that the whole world that rejects his faith, and
    are not circumcised are Gentile dogs, and will be damned. The
    heathen are equally as tenacious about their {96} principles,
    and the Christian consigns all to perdition who cannot bow to
    his creed and submit to his _ipse dixit_. But while one portion
    of the human race are judging and condemning the other without
    mercy, the great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole of
    the human family with a fatherly care, and paternal regard. He
    views them as His offspring; and without any of those contracted
    feelings that influence the children of men, causes "_His sun_ to
    rise on the evil and the good, and sends _His rain_ on the just
    and the unjust." He holds the reins of judgment in His hands; He
    is a wise lawgiver, and will judge all men not according to the
    narrow contracted notions of men, but "according to the deeds
    done in the body whether they be good or evil;" or whether those
    deeds were done in England, America, Spain, Turkey, India: He will
    judge them "not according to what they have not, but according to
    what they have;" those who have lived without law will be judged
    without law, and those who have a law will be judged by that law;
    we need not doubt the wisdom and intelligence of the great Jehovah.
    He will award judgment or mercy to all nations according to their
    several deserts, their means of obtaining intelligence, the laws by
    which they are governed; the facilities afforded them of obtaining
    correct information; and His inscrutable designs in relation to the
    human family; and when the designs of God shall be made manifest,
    and the curtain of futurity be withdrawn, we shall all of us
    eventually have to confess, that the Judge of all the earth has
    done right.

    The situation of the Christian nations after death is a subject
    that has called forth all the wisdom and talent of the philosopher
    and the divine; and it is an opinion which is generally received,
    that the destiny of man is irretrievably fixed at his death;
    and that he is made either eternally happy, or eternally
    miserable,--that if a man dies without a knowledge of God, he must
    be eternally damned, without any mitigation of his punishment,
    alleviation of his pain or the most latent hope of a deliverance
    while endless ages shall roll along. However orthodox this
    principle may be, we shall find that it is at variance with the
    testimony of holy writ; for our Savior says that all manner of sin,
    and blasphemy shall be forgiven men wherewith they shall blaspheme;
    but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven,
    neither in _this world_, nor in the _world to come_; evidently
    showing that there are sins which may be forgiven in the _world to
    come_; although the sin of blasphemy cannot be forgiven.

    Peter also in speaking concerning our Savior says that "He
    went and preached unto spirits in prison, which sometime were
    disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the
    days of Noah." I Pet. iii: 19, 20. Here then, we have an account
    of our Savior preaching to the spirits in prison; to spirits that
    had been imprisoned from the days of Noah; and what did He preach
    to them? that they were to stay there? Certainly not; let His own
    declaration testify: 'He hath sent me to heal the broken hearted,
    to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
    the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised." Luke iv: 18.
    Isaiah has it: "_To bring out the prisoner from the prison_, and
    them that sit in darkness _from the prison house_." Is. xlii: 7.
    It is very evident from this that He not only went to preach to
    them, but to deliver, or bring _them out of the prison house_.
    Isaiah in testifying concerning the calamities that will overtake
    the inhabitants of the earth says: "The earth shall reel to and
    fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and
    the transgressions thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall
    fall and not {97} rise again. And it shall come to pass in that
    day, that the Lord shall punish the hosts of the high ones that
    are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. And they
    shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit,
    and shall be _shut up in prison_, and after many days _shall they
    be visited_." Thus we find that God will deal with all the human
    family equally; and that as the antediluvians had their day of
    visitation, so will those characters referred to by Isaiah, have
    their time of visitation and deliverance, after having been many
    days in prison.

    The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected
    with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it
    rolled into existence, or ever the "morning stars sung together
    for joy," the past, the present and the future, were, and are with
    Him one eternal now; He knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities
    of the antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be
    connected with the human family; their weakness and strength, their
    power and glory, apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and
    iniquity; He comprehended the fall of man and their redemption; He
    knew the plan of salvation and pointed it out; He was acquainted
    with the situation of all nations and with their destiny; He
    ordered all things according to the counsel of His _own_ will, He
    knows the situation of both the living and the dead, and has made
    ample provision for their redemption according to their several
    circumstances and the laws of the Kingdom of God, whether in this
    world, or in the world to come. The idea that some men form of the
    justice and mercy of God, is too foolish for an intelligent man
    to think of; for instance it is common for many of our orthodox
    preachers to suppose that if a man is not what they call converted,
    if he dies in that state, he must remain eternally in hell without
    any hope:--

        "Infinite years in torment must he spend
         And never, never, never, have an end."

    And yet this eternal misery is made frequently to rest upon the
    merest casualty,--the breaking of a shoe-string, the tearing of
    a coat of those officiating, or the peculiar location in which
    a person lives may be the means indirectly of his damnation, or
    the cause of his not being saved. I will suppose a case which is
    not extraordinary: Two men who have been equally wicked, who have
    neglected religion, are both of them taken sick at the same time;
    one of them has the good fortune to be visited by a praying man,
    and he gets converted a few minutes before he dies; the other
    sends for three different praying men, a tailor, a shoemaker and a
    tinman. The tinman has a handle to solder on to a can; the tailor
    a button-hole to work on some coat that is needed in a hurry; and
    the shoemaker has a patch to put on somebody's boot; they none
    of them can go in time, the man dies and goes to hell; one of
    these is exalted to Abraham's bosom; he sits down in the presence
    of God, and enjoys eternal, uninterrupted happiness, while the
    other who was equally as good as he, sinks to eternal damnation,
    irretrievable misery and hopeless despair; because a man had a
    boot to mend, the button-hole of a coat to work, or a handle to
    solder on to a saucepan. The plans of Jehovah are not so unjust;
    the statements of holy writ so visionary; nor the plan of salvation
    for the human family so incompatible with common sense; at such
    proceedings God would frown with indignation, angels would hide
    their heads in shame; and every virtuous, intelligent man would
    recoil. If human laws award to each man his deserts, and punish all
    {98} delinquents according to their several crimes; surely the Lord
    will not be more cruel than man, for He is a wise Legislator and
    His laws are equitable, His enactments more just and His decisions
    more perfect than those of man; and as man judges his fellow man
    by law, and punishes him according to the penalty of that law,
    so does the God of heaven judge "according to the deeds done in
    the body." To say that the heathen would be damned because they
    did not believe the gospel would be preposterous; and to say that
    the Jews would all be damned that do not believe in Jesus, would
    be equally absurd; for "how can they believe on him of whom they
    have not heard; and how can they hear without a preacher; and _how
    can he preach except he be sent_;" consequently neither Jew nor
    heathen can be culpable for rejecting the conflicting opinions of
    sectarianism, nor for rejecting any testimony but that which is
    sent of God, for as the preacher cannot preach except he be sent,
    so the hearer cannot believe without he hears a sent preacher; and
    cannot be condemned for what he has not heard; and being without
    law will have to be judged without law.

    When speaking about the blessings pertaining to the gospel, and
    the consequences connected with disobedience to its requirements,
    we are frequently asked the question, What has become of our
    fathers? Will they all be damned for not obeying the gospel,
    when they never heard it? Certainly not. But they will possess
    the same privilege that we here enjoy, through the medium of the
    _everlasting_ Priesthood, which not only administers on earth but
    in heaven, and the wise dispensations of the great Jehovah; hence
    those characters referred to by Isaiah will be visited by this
    Priesthood, and come out of their prison, upon the same principle
    as those who were disobedient in the days of Noah, were visited by
    our Savior (who possessed the everlasting Melchisedek Priesthood)
    and had the gospel preached to them by Him in prison; and in order
    that they might fulfill all the requisitions of God, their living
    friends were baptized for their dead friends, and thus fulfilled
    the requirement of God which says: "Except a man be born again of
    water, and of the spirit he can in no wise enter into the kingdom
    of heaven;" they were baptized of course, not for themselves, but
    for their dead. Crysostum says that the Marchionites practiced
    baptism for the dead, "after a catachumen was dead they hid a
    living man under the bed of the deceased; then coming to the dead
    man they asked him whether he would receive baptism, and he making
    no answer, the other answered for him, and said that he would be
    baptized in his stead; and so they baptized the living for the
    dead."

    The church of course at that time was degenerate, and that
    particular form might be incorrect, but the thing is sufficiently
    plain in the Scriptures, hence Paul, in speaking of the doctrine,
    says, "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if
    the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?"
    I Cor. 15: 29.

    Hence it was that so great a responsibility rested upon the
    generation in which our Savior lived; for, said He, "That upon you
    may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth from the blood
    of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias,
    whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say unto
    you, all these things shall come upon this generation." Matt,
    xxiii: 35, 36.

    Hence as they possessed greater privileges than any other
    generation, not only pertaining to themselves but to their dead,
    their sin was greater, as they not only neglected their own
    salvation but that {99} of their progenitors, and hence their blood
    was required at their hands. And now as the great purposes of God
    are hastening to their accomplishment and the things spoken of in
    the prophets are fulfilling, as the Kingdom of God is established
    on the earth, and the ancient order of things restored, the Lord
    has manifested to us this duty and privilege, and we are commanded
    to be baptized for our dead, thus fulfilling the words of Obadiah
    when speaking of the glory of the latter day. "And saviors shall
    come up on Mount Zion to judge the remnant of Esau; and the
    kingdom shall be the Lord's." A view of these things reconciles
    the Scriptures of truth, justifies the ways of God to man, places
    the human family upon an equal footing, and harmonizes with every
    principle of righteousness, justice and truth. We will conclude
    with the words of Peter: "For the time past of our life may suffice
    us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles. * * * For, for this
    cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they
    might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according
    to God in the spirit."--Times and Seasons, Vol. 3, pages 759-761.

    "_That moment that men seek to build up themselves, in preference
    to the kingdom of God, and seek to hoard up riches, while the widow
    and the fatherless, the sick and afflicted around they are in
    poverty and want, it proves that their hearts are weaned from their
    God_."

    --_Brigham Young_.

    "_We glory in our tribulation, because we know that God is with us,
    that He is our friend, and that He will save our souls. We do not
    care for them that can kill the body; they cannot harm our souls_."

    --_Joseph Smith, December 16, 1818_.

Footnotes:

1. In a number of articles by Zenas H. Gurley, one of the founders
of the "Reorganized" church, in the _Saints Herald_, Vol. I, the
"Reorganization" is referred to as "a new organization of the Church."
This agrees with the statement of the president of that church, in the
_Saints Herald_, Feb. 17, 1904. Said he: "The Church, using the word to
mean the Church rejected, has not been again received."

2. The font was dedicated November 8, 1841, by President Brigham Young
in the presence of and under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith.
Millennial Star 18: 744-745.

3. History of "Reorganized" church, Vol. 3, page 245.

4. Conference resolutions pamphlet of "Reorganized" church, page 82.

5. Editorial in "Saints Herald," Feb. 17, 1904.

6. In his testimony before the Circuit Court, at Kansas City, in the
"Temple Lot" suit, he said: "No, sir, I did not state that I was
ordained by my father; I did not make the statement. I was not ordained
by my father as his successor; according to my understanding of the
word _ordain_, I was not." Plaintiff's Abstract, page 79, paragraph 126.

7. In a communication from the president of the "Reorganized" church,
which is now in the hands of the writer, the statement is made that
there is nothing in sections 127 and 128 (CIX and CX "Reorganite"
edition) of the Doctrine and Covenants, "to indicate that they are
revelations. These articles refer only to the baptism for the dead."
The Prophet Joseph, however, in these articles on baptism for the dead
declares that they _are_ revelations. See sec. 127, verses 4, 6, 8 and
10; also 128, verse 2.

{100}



ACKNOWLEDGE YOUR FAULTS.

By Elder Orson F. Whitney in Millennial Star, 1882.

"He that humbleth himself shall be exaulted."--_Jesus_.

If there is one thing more than another in the character of a
great man which challenges respect and admiration, and proves most
conclusively his worthiness to the title, it is the readiness with
which he acknowledges a fault, confesses an error, and manifests
sincere repentance for wrong-doing. We would not be understood as
affirming that none are great but those who evince this disposition,
for that would be to the exclusion of many whose virtues well merit
consideration and esteem; but we do feel confident in asserting that
among the great they are the greatest, among the noble the noblest, and
among the admired, most deserving of admiration.

Many people consider it an evidence of weakness to acknowledge a
mistake or to own that they are ever in the wrong, and flatter
themselves with the idea that they display true courage and heroic
firmness by refusing to repent of an evil act, by declining to concede
a personal imperfection, or persisting in a mistaken belief or practice
after having been convinced of the error of their course. A more
egregious blunder could scarcely be committed. The facts are exactly
to the contrary. It is weakness which induces anyone, after having been
persuaded of an error, to still cling to that error. It is not courage,
it is cowardice, not firmness, but stubbornness, which prevents a
person from acknowledging a fault, or repenting of an evil deed.
The man of genuine courage is he who dares confess his follies and
imperfections; the soul of strength and firmness, which everybody must
honor and admire, is the one which forsakes and resists the allurements
of evil, and stands up for the right in the face of every opposing
power or influence.

Various opinions are entertained as to what constitutes greatness of
character. With the ignorant masses it would be aristocratic rank,
high official station, or the possession of unlimited wealth; with
the more enlightened classes, military prowess or great intellectual
achievements; but to the true Christian there is but one idea worthy
to be accepted as a {101} criterion of guidance in the carving out
and formation of a perfect character. The noblest Being that ever
walked the earth, could claim no worldly rank or aristocratic title;
the mightest character the world has ever seen came neither to dazzle
by intellectual brilliance nor to devastate with fire and sword; the
wealthiest and greatest of all the sons of God had not bread to eat
nor where to lay his aching head. He was one who preached purity of
mind and lowliness of heart, and practiced what he preached with all
consistency. He taught his followers that moral worth was superior to
mental endowment; that humility, not haughtiness, was characteristic
of nobility on high; that all who would be masters hereafter, must
expect to be servants in this probation; that it was far more heroic
to save than to slaughter mankind, and that the chief lesson of life
was to learn to sacrifice earthly things in order to lay up treasures
in heaven. He taught that repentance of sins must necessarily precede
redemption therefrom, since it was impossible for sin to inherit His
holy kingdom. He exhorted to beware of self-righteousness, and declared
that the publican, who with bended head and humility of heart cried
out, "God be merciful unto me a sinner," was more to be justified
than the proud and boastful Pharisee, who, instead of confessing his
sins and humbly suing for forgiveness, stood erect in self-righteous
conceit, thanking the Lord that he had no sins, and congratulating
himself that he was pure and holy in the eyes of that being whose voice
calls all men to repentance, and declares that all who say they are
without sin deceive themselves and the truth is not in them.

Two classes of Pharisees abound in modern society; those who actually
imagine they are without fault, and those who, though conscious of
defects, stubbornly refuse to acknowledge them. The former, enveloped
in pious vanity and lulled into fancied security by the delusive hope
that their souls are already "saved," sit down in the very midst
of the fight, take off their armor and lay aside their weapons, as
complacently as if the battle was already won; while the others, like
the inmates of a beleaguered city, conscious of weakness and certain
of eventual defeat, but wilfully preferring death and dishonor to the
merciful alternative of an honorable surrender, entrench themselves
behind the weak walls of arrogance and pride, and await the onslaught
of the all-conquering foe. Poor dupes of priestcraft and iniquity! The
blind worshipper of self, however rapt in the ecstasies of sanctified
egotism, will find too late that the warfare against sin ends only with
life itself, and that "hopes of salvation," without truth for a {102}
basis and reason for a guide, are as ineffectual as faith without works
or zeal without judgment. As for those who knowingly wed themselves to
error, loving darkness rather than light, and choosing the paths of sin
to the ways of righteousness, the day of their disaster is near. The
battering rams of eternal truth will soon be leveled at their crumbling
walls, the refuge of lies will be swept away, and the acts of folly and
wickedness they were once ashamed to confess, proclaimed in a voice of
thunder from the house tops. It is a great mistake to suppose anything
is to be lost by acknowledging sin, and covenanting to forsake it
forever. On the contrary, everything is to be gained. God has declared
that he cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance. How
then can a man please God if he will not repent of his sins? How can
he repent if he will not acknowledge that he has sins? And how can
he claim that he has no sins without branding himself as a liar and
consequently as a sinner in the sight of heaven?

It is the act of a hero to acknowledge an error. It is the act of a
coward to deny or resent a righteous accusation. Herod was a coward
when he imprisoned and beheaded John the Baptist for reprimanding him
for committing the crime of adultery. David was never more a hero than
when, on being accused of a similar misdeed, he humbly acknowledged his
transgression. The contrast is sublime. Herod, the petty tetrarch, with
the instincts of a guilty coward, resenting the imputation and wreaking
vengeance upon his accuser; David, the illustrious monarch, with a
thousand fold his power and prestige, bending from his throne before
one of the meanest of his subjects, and humbly confessing the crime of
which he was accused. David before Goliath was not so brave a man as
David before Nathan the Prophet. Deprive him of one dark stain upon
his life, and the royal son of Jesse stands out as one of the grandest
characters in the history of the world. A king, wealthy and powerful,
a warrior, mighty and renowned, a poet whose genius was the literary
splendor of his age; but as a king he was never greater, as a warrior
never mightier, as a poet never grander or more sublimely pathetic,
than when he bowed his head and wept, exclaiming, "I have sinned
against the Lord."

{103}



AN INTERVIEW IN THE ATLANTA CONSTITUTION ON THE "MORMON" FAITH,

With Ben. E. Rich, of

_The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints_.

(From the Atlanta Constitution, March 26, 1899.)

The Mormon conference held in Atlanta during the past week was fairly
well attended, and the elders were assigned to their new fields of
labor, and have left the city in pairs. It is the policy of the Mormon
church to send their elders out two by two, traveling without purse
or scrip; they receive no remuneration, so far as earthly reward is
concerned, for the labor performed in the missionary field. They are
called from the farm, from the store and other avocations of life to
go to the various parts of the earth and proclaim the gospel as they
understand it; remaining from two to three years, or until they are
honorably released to return to their homes.

Elder Ben. E. Rich is President of the Southern States Mission, and has
charge of the elders traveling in the states of Virginia, Tennessee,
Kentucky, Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, Florida, South Carolina,
North Carolina and Georgia. He was present at the conference just
closed, and gave The Constitution the following interview concerning
the doctrines of the Mormon faith. We present the same to our readers,
as Mormonism from a Mormon standpoint:

Reporter--"Mr. Rich, I understand you are an Elder in the Mormon
Church. Why is it called by that name?"

Elder Ben. E. Rich--"I am an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints. That is its proper title, as recognized by all its
members. The word 'Mormon' is taken from {104} the Book of Mormon. It
is the name of a prophet of God who lived on the American continent
several hundred years ago, and who compiled and abridged the writings
of other prophets who preceded him, and left his record, which was
buried in a hill and was obtained by the Prophet Joseph Smith in this
century and translated by him, through the gift and power of God."

"Oh, that I suppose is the Mormon Bible?"

"No, sir; the 'Mormon' Bible is the same as that which is received
throughout Christendom, commonly known as the King James translation.
We use no other Bible. The Book of Mormon is a record of the history
and revelations of God to the people who formerly inhabited the Western
Hemisphere, while the Bible records the history and revelations given
upon the Eastern continent. They both run together and harmonize, being
inspired with the same spirit, but they are separate and distinct, and
the Book of Mormon is not called the Bible by the Latter Day Saints."

"Well, is not the Book of Mormon an addition to the Bible, and is it
not in violation of the last chapter in the Bible, which says, 'If any
man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book?'" (Rev. xxii: 18.)

"It is an addition to the Bible in one sense of the term, but not in
the sense of the prohibition which you have cited. Man is forbidden to
add to the words of the book which John the Beloved wrote by divine
command, and is called the Apocalypse, or Book of Revelation. Compilers
place that book last in the canon of scripture, but scholars state that
the epistles of John were written later than the Revelation. Be that as
it may, John himself must proclaim further revelation after writing the
book, for he was told while in the vision, 'Thou must prophesy again
before many peoples and nations and tongues and kings.' (Rev. x: 11.)
There is no contradiction in this, because God, through His servants,
or in any way He pleases, may reveal His will, give commandments and
manifest light and truth. It is preposterous to think that God sealed
up His own lips when He merely forbade man to add to what He reveals.
That is a standing commandment, as it was embodied in the Mosaic law.
'Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye
diminish aught from it.' (Deut. iv: 2.) The common rendering of the
words in the Book of Revelation when applied to the law given thousands
of years before, would make all the prophets and apostles and Jesus
Christ Himself transgressors of the commandment. It {105} simply means
that when God reveals anything, man shall not add to or take from that
which He communicates."

"But, seeing that we have the word of God, the Bible, and Christian
churches teaching what is in the Bible, what need is there of another
church and another revelation?"

"The very fact that there are so many conflicting churches, all
professing to establish their opposing creeds upon the Bible, is
evidence of itself that something more is needed, to set mankind right
on the doctrine of Christ and make the word of God plain to the common
understanding. No two churches or religious organizations understand
the Scriptures alike. Even preachers of the same denomination disagree
as to the meaning of certain passages, and Christendom, so-called,
is therefore a very Babel of confusion. 'God is not the author of
confusion.'" (I. Cor. xiv: 33.)

"But, do you mean to say that the Book of Mormon will set these matters
right and clear up all that is obscure in the Bible?"

"No, we do not make any such claim as that. The Book of Mormon merely
discloses what was taught on this land centuries ago by divine
commandment and revelation, as the Bible relates what was taught ages
ago in Palestine, except that the Book of Mormon is very much plainer
and couched in much simpler language. But it is valuable as casting
light on the Jewish scriptures and in being the record of God's
dealings with a large portion of the human family, who could not be
reached by the prophets and apostles who ministered on the Eastern
Hemisphere. It gives an account of a visit made by Jesus Christ after
His resurrection, to the people on this land, and the establishment
among them of His church, organized on the same pattern as the
church in Palestine, with the same doctrines, ordinances, gifts and
blessings. All this being made much more definite than it is in the
Jewish scriptures, the Book of Mormon is therefore a great aid to the
understanding of Christian truth. But we do not depend upon any book
for the gospel which we preach or the order of the church to which we
belong."

"Do you not, then, take your doctrines, authority and church discipline
from either the Book of Mormon, or the Bible or both?"

"No, sir. Everything in our church organization, its principles,
ordinances, authority and administrations, has been revealed directly
from Heaven in the nineteenth century. We refer to the Bible and the
Book of Mormon to show that our church and all pertaining to it are
exactly similar to what {106} Christ set up and organized when He was
on earth in both hemispheres and that He is 'the same yesterday, today
and forever.'"

"How is your church organized, and wherein does it differ from other
Christian churches?"

"It is actually and really the Church of Jesus Christ, because it is
organized under Christ's direct supervision and commandment, He having
revealed Himself to Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and having continued to
communicate the will of the Father by revelation down to the present
time. The church is composed of persons who, having come to the years
of accountability, have been led to believe in God the Father, in
His Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Spirit, have repented of their
sins and have been baptized or buried in water by immersion for the
remission of sins, and have received the gift of the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of the hands of persons divinely authorized to administer in
the name of Jesus Christ. They are entitled through faith and obedience
to these ordinances to the enjoyment of all the gifts, manifestations,
revelations, signs, healings and other blessings which belonged to the
primitive Christian church, the members of which were called Saints.
Those disciples of the Savior were called 'Christians' in derision by
their enemies, just as the Latter Day Saints are nicknamed 'Mormons' in
these times."

"But, do they really have these gifts, and were they not all done away
with after the days of the apostles?"

"They do enjoy all those gifts and manifestations according to their
faith and fidelity, the Lord, through His spirit dividing to every one
severally as He wills." (See I Cor. xii.)

"If those gifts were done away after the days of the apostles it was
because living faith had departed and a dead form had taken its place.
In support of the 'done away' idea the words of Paul in I Corinthians
xiii: 8, are quoted: 'Charity never faileth, but whether there be
prophecies they shall fail, whether there be tongues they shall cease,
whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away,' but they neglect to
add verses 9 and 10, which are part of the Apostle's statement. He
says: 'For we know in part, and we prophesy in part, but when that
which is perfect is come then that which is in part shall be done
away.' So then it is not until that which is perfect is come that
these gifts are to be done away. To emphasize this the Apostle adds
(xiii: 12): 'Now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also
I am known.' He follows this up by saying: 'Follow after charity and
desire spiritual gifts, but rather that we may prophesy.' And again
he says: {107} 'Wherefore brethren covet to prophesy and forbid not
to speak with tongues' (xiv: 1-39). That which is perfect is not yet
come, unless it be perfect confusion, and instead of advancing toward
the perfection of which the Apostle spoke, modern Christianity has
lost the gifts which he exhorted them to desire and strive for. The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints seeks after the gifts and
enjoys them, and in that respect differs from orthodoxy, so-called
Christianity."

"Is there any other difference between your church and others?"

"Yes, there is this essential difference--for one thing, the authority
to preach and administer the ordinances of the gospel held by the
early apostles and others has been restored and is now held by the
apostles and elders and other ministers in the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter Day Saints, and that church has in it apostles, and prophets,
evangelists, pastors, teachers, bishops, elders, deacons, and all the
officers which we read about in the New Testament. (See I Corinthians
xii: 28; Ephesians iv: 11-12; I Timothy iii: 1-8; Titus i: 5.)

"But did not Jesus give authority to all His ministers when He said,
'Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature?'"

"If you will read the chapter from which you quote, you will see that
this authority given by the Savior was only to the eleven apostles--one
of the twelve having betrayed Him--whom he had called and ordained for
the work of the ministry and whom he afterwards endowed with power
from on high. They had authority when so directed by the Holy Ghost
to ordain others to assist them in the work of the ministry, but, as
commanded in Hebrews v: 5, 'No man taketh this honor unto himself, but
he that is called of God as was Aaron.' It is only by revelation and
commandment of God that men are authorized to minister in His name.
Modern ministers repudiate the doctrine of immediate revelation, and
declare that there has been no divine communication by revelation since
John received his vision on the island, Patmos. They, therefore, cut
themselves off from divine authority and proclaim themselves man-made
ministers, teaching by their own learning and destitute of that divine
inspiration which is essential to an authorized minister of Christ.
In this you will see a wide difference between the organization and
authority of the 'Mormon' church and the churches of discordant
Christendom."

"You say that the authority of the apostleship and {108} ministry has
been restored. That implies that it had been lost or taken away?"

"Certainly. The early apostles predicted an apostacy and departure
from the true faith and the introduction of heresies by false
teachers, and their prophecies were literally fulfilled. (See Acts xx:
29-30; Galatians i: 6-9; II. Thessalonians ii: 1-12; I. Timothy iv:
1-3; II. Timothy iii: 1-7; II. Peter ii: 1-3; Revelation xii: 1-6;
Revelation xiv: 8.) After the apostles were slain and other men holding
authority departed from the earth, darkness came in upon the churches,
persecution had its influence in driving many persons into the beggarly
elements of the world, paganism began to be mingled with the remnant of
true Christianity, the Roman state, which had fought the church, became
amalgamated with what was left of it, and priestly power foreign to
the spirit of Christ was exalted, clothed with purple and fine linen,
the ordinances were changed, the pure spirit of the gospel departed,
human authority took the place of the divine, the apostacy became
general and finally universal. Papal power held sway everywhere until
the Reformation, when schisms and new theories divided Christendom,
and sects have multiplied from that time until the present, none of
the leaders of these movements claiming to have received revelations
from God, but all giving their own interpretations to the dead letter
of former divine communications, and thus while there have been hosts
of good people and many learned and pious preachers, the authority of
the apostleship and priesthood of the primitive Christian church has
not been had among men, and so 'confusion worse confounded' has come
upon the world, and heathen and professing Christian are alike, without
divine authority."

"In what way do you claim this authority has been restored?"

"In the first place, the angel whom John saw in the vision, as
recorded in Revelation xiv: 6-7, came to Joseph Smith and revealed
'the everlasting gospel to be preached to every nation, kindred,
tongue and people.' The first principles of the Gospel are, faith in
God, and in Jesus Christ His Son, repentance of all sin, baptism by
immersion in water for the remission of sins, and the gift of the
Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Baptism and the laying on of
hands, to be effectual, must be administered by divine authority. This
having been withdrawn from the earth centuries ago, it could only be
restored by divine communication. Therefore, in the next place, John
the Baptist, who was beheaded after acting as the {109} forerunner
of Christ, was sent from heaven as the forerunner of Christ's second
advent, and ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (May 15, 1829),
to the authority and priesthood which He held when on earth. They
were thus commissioned to baptize each other. They could also preach
repentance and baptize all who received their word, but they could not
confirm them by the laying on of hands. Subsequently, however, they
were visited by the apostles Peter, James and John, who were pillars
of the early Christian church, holding the keys of the kingdom, and
they ordained Joseph and Oliver to the Holy apostleship--the higher
or Melchisedek priesthood, with power to confer the Holy Ghost upon
baptized believers, and to usher in the last dispensation, 'the
dispensation of the fullness of time,' spoken of in Ephesians i: 10.

"Under this authority the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
Saints was organized in the state of New York, April 6, 1830, six
members conforming to the laws of the state in signing papers for
its incorporation. The gospel was preached, repentant believers
were baptized, the Holy Ghost was poured out upon them, the sick
were healed, the heavens were opened, visions and dreams and divine
manifestations, with the gift of tongues, interpretations, prophecy,
wisdom, knowledge, discerning of spirits and numerous revelations,
were the consequence, and the union thus promoted became a marvel to
unbelievers. As the work progressed elders were ordained under the same
authority who went out without purse and scrip, as did the servants of
God of old, meeting with the same kind of success and the same sort of
persecution. Thus the church was built up, and under divine direction
was set in order on the same pattern as the church which Christ and His
apostles organized in person."

"Will you explain the order of that organization as it now exists in
your church?"

"Yes, sir. The apostleship is the highest office in the church. It
holds the keys of the priesthood after the order of Melchisedek and
includes all the lesser offices in the church. Three apostles stand at
the head and are called the first presidency, that is to say one man
is the president of the whole church, having the power and the right
to receive revelations from God for its guidance and to regulate its
affairs in all the world. He has two counselors, and this trinity is
the highest presiding authority in the church on earth. Next are the
twelve apostles, or special witnesses of Jesus Christ, {110} holding
authority to open the door of the gospel to all nations, and under
the direction of the first presidency, to regulate its affairs in all
nations. They have the same authority, power and spirit as the apostles
of old and act in a similar capacity in the latter days. Next to them
are the seventies, seventy elders ordained and appointed for the
purpose are organized into a quorum or council, seven of their number
being their presidents. There are a large number of these quorums of
seventy in the church, each quorum having seven presidents of its own,
but all being under the supervision of the first seven presidents of
the seventies. They form an appendage to the apostleship and act under
the direction of the twelve apostles, as missionaries in all the world.
They are expected to be minute men and to go when called and preach the
gospel, without salary or any earthly reward. The high priests are a
body of church officers to minister in the organized branches of the
church, as presiding officers or standing ministers among the saints,
the elders who are not of the seventies are also standing ministers,
appendages to the high priesthood and are organized into quorums, each
numbering ninety-six and presided over by three of their number, a
president and two counselors. All these orders which I have named are
included in the higher or Melchisedek priesthood.

"Next in order come the priests after the order of Aaron, having
authority to baptize, administer the Lord's supper, preach, teach,
expound, exhort and invite all to come unto Christ; also to visit the
members of the church and instruct them in church duties. Forty-eight
of these priests form a quorum, presided over by three of their
number. As appendages to their office, there are the teachers and the
deacons. Twenty-four of the teachers form a quorum, presided over
by three of the number. They are to watch over the church, see that
there is no iniquity in it and assist the priests in their duties,
but they cannot administer ordinances. Twelve deacons form a quorum,
presided over by three of their number. Their duty is to attend to
the smaller temporalities of the branches of the church where they
reside. The offices of priest, teacher and deacon are in the lesser or
Aaronic priesthood, the chief officer of which is the bishop. A bishop
should be a lineal descendant of Aaron, but in the absence of such a
descendant a high priest in the Melchisedek order may be set apart and
appointed to act in that capacity.

"The church in Zion, that is, the place where saints are gathered, is
organized in this way. Each settlement of the saints form a bishop's
ward, over which a bishop and two {111} counselors, who are also high
priests set apart for that position, are appointed to take charge.
They take care of the temporal affairs of the church in their ward,
look after the poor, give advice to all that seek for it, and as high
priest preside over public meetings and have the oversight of church
affairs in their locality generally. They also form a spiritual court
to hear charges against accused members and decide upon them after
hearing evidence on both sides. In cases of dispute between church
members which cannot be settled by the parties or with the aid of the
visiting teachers, the bishopric try the case and render a decision
which must be according to justice and equity. If either of the parties
is dissatisfied an appeal can be taken to the high council of the stake
of which the ward forms a part. Usually all the wards in a county are
organized into what is called a stake of Zion. This is presided over
by a high priest with two counselors appointed and set apart for the
purpose. The high council which is also organized in each stake of Zion
is composed of twelve high priests set apart to that office and with
the stake presidency, forming a court of appeal, to which cases from
the bishops' courts may be taken and where justice may be secured. They
are also original tribunals for decisions in doctrines and discipline.
The decisions of the high council are final, unless on revision by the
first presidency error is discovered when the case may be remanded for
a new trial. The benefits of these church tribunals are had without
cost to any of the parties, all these church officers serving without
remuneration.

"All the stakes of Zion are under the direction of the presidency of
the church and are visited by them or by the apostles, and quarterly
conferences are held in each of them for general instruction and for
making such changes as many be necessary to their proper management.
The officers named are also presented before the people in conference
assembled for their votes, every member, male and female, having a
voice in church affairs, and they vote upon the acceptance or rejection
of those officers. At the general conferences, held semiannually, the
first presidency, apostles and all leading officials of the church
are also presented for the approval or disapproval of the body of the
church.

"Outside of Zion each mission has a president who takes charge of all
its affairs, and each branch of the mission has a branch president,
amenable to a conference president, and he to the president of
the mission, who also directs the labors of the traveling elders,
missionaries sent to labor in the field. Thus the whole church is so
organized that each officer has his {112} defined place and sphere of
authority and the whole system inspired by one spirit moves like a
well regulated living body, the president or head of the whole church,
who is a prophet, a seer and a revelator, directing it under divine
authority and inspiration."

"What is the attitude of your church in regard to other Christian
denominations?"

"It recognizes truth wherever it is found. It regards all human effort
for the development and promulgation of truth as good and blessed of
Deity. It recognizes the benefits which have come to mankind through
the labors of good men and women everywhere, no matter what sect they
belong to or what language they speak. But it has no affiliation with
error. Truth and error will not combine. There can be but one Church
of Jesus Christ, no matter how many branches it may have nor how many
members. It is unreasonable and also unscriptural to say that the one
living and true God, and Jesus Christ whom He has sent, would establish
a number of discordant contending religions. The good intentions,
sincerity of motives and pious acts of men and women are no proof of
themselves that they are divinely authorized. They are to be admired
and respected for what they are, but this should not deceive any one
as to what they are not. Heathendom as well as Christendom furnishes
striking illustrations of purity of conduct and sincerity, but in
neither instance does this prove correctness of principle or divinity
in organization. Christ when on earth established but one church.
All others were outside of its pale. It is the same today. There is
only one true Church of Christ, and it is that which He Himself has
established and which He recognizes and directs. All others are the
institutions of men, to be valued for what they are worth, but not to
be viewed as divinely established. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter
Day Saints has no quarrel with any of them; it does not attempt to
deprive them of any light they may have, but only endeavors to correct
their errors and bring them into greater light, that they may receive
greater blessings, with full and complete salvation in the kingdom of
God."

"Is it necessary for preachers and members of other churches to be
baptized anew in order to enter your church and be saved?"

"The voice of God is to all people, without exception, repent and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission
of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost and shall
know that you have received {113} the truth and that God and Jesus
Christ His Son have manifested themselves in this age of the world, and
can be approached as of old, and that the blessings and gifts enjoyed
in former days may be had in their fulness in these days. This is the
only way of salvation and in this church is the only divine authority
to administer the ordinances of salvation. They who receive this gospel
and endure unto the end will be saved; they who wilfully reject it will
be condemned."

"Is it necessary that baptism should be administered by total
immersion? Will not sprinkling or pouring water upon the candidate be
sufficient?"

"Baptism means immersion. It is a burial in water and afterwards
the coming forth into a new life. It is symbolical of death and the
resurrection. Paul said: 'Therefore we are buried with Him by baptism
into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.
For if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death, we
shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection' (Roman vi: 4-5). The
believer becomes dead to sin by repentance; he is buried from the old
life by baptism. Coming from the womb of water into the air, he is born
of water. Through remission of sins given in baptism, but proceeding
from the atonement, he is born of the water and is thus prepared as
a new creature in Christ Jesus to receive the Holy Ghost and thus be
born of the spirit. Jesus said when on earth, 'Except a man be born of
water and of the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.' (John
iii: 5.) He set the example. He was baptized by John, His forerunner,
in the river Jordan. When 'He came up straightway out of the water the
heavens were opened and the spirit of God descended like a dove and
lighted upon Him.' Thus He was born of the water and of the spirit and
left us an example that we should follow in His steps. All other forms
of baptism are inventions of men, and are not recognized of God; nor
is this form, accepted of heaven unless administered by one who has
the divine right to do so, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. The Lord accepts only such ordinances as are
performed by His authority and according to His commandment."

"Would you baptize infants by immersion?"

"We would not baptize infants at all. That would be a mockery in the
sight of God. Faith and repentance must precede baptism. Infants cannot
believe and they have nothing to repent of. Jesus did not baptize
little children, but laid His hands on them and blessed them, saying,
'Of such is the {114} kingdom of heaven' (Matthew xix: 13-15). We give
names to infants and bless them after this pattern, but do not baptize
children until they come to years of accountability, are able to
understand right from wrong, to believe in Christ and repent of their
sins. We baptize no children less than eight years of age."

"If the world has been without divine authority, and the ordinances
you speak of are necessary for salvation, do you mean to say that all
the millions of good people who have died since the days of the early
apostles and elders are lost?"

"No, we do not believe any such monstrous thing. I might ask you
what has become of all the millions of good people in heathen lands,
and other places where the name of Jesus Christ was never preached.
We are told in Scripture that there is 'no other name given under
heaven whereby we must be saved' (Acts iv: 12). But I will answer you
directly. God has revealed that the gospel of Jesus Christ will be
preached to every creature. Those who do not hear it in this life, will
hear it in the life to come. The idea that God's mercies extend only to
the narrow sphere of this mortal life, is unworthy of Him whose 'tender
mercies are over all His works,' and whose justice and mercy endure
forever. When Jesus was put to death in the flesh, he was quickened by
the spirit, and as the Scriptures tell us, 'He went and preached to
the spirits in prison, which sometimes were disobedient when once the
long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was
preparing' (I Peter iii: 18-20). This shows that spirits after they
leave the body can be preached to and instructed. The purpose of this
is shown by Peter in the fourth chapter, sixth verse. He says: 'For
this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that
they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according
to God in the spirit.' Thus all mankind will have the opportunity of
hearing the one true and everlasting gospel, either in the body or out
of the body. It is the intelligent immortal entity in the body which
receives or rejects light and truth and is the responsible being.
It is no less a thinking, sentient, responsible person when out of
the body than when clothed with mortality. The spirit can believe or
disbelieve, repent or remain unregenerate, bow to the divine command
or persist in rebellion. But the earthly ordinances belong to this
material world, and therefore cannot be performed in spirit spheres.
Yet Jesus declared, 'except a man be born of water and of the spirit he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.' Baptism, the laying on of hands
and similar ceremonies must therefore be {115} attended to by some
one on earth for and in behalf of the dead. This is what the Apostle
Paul referred to when teaching the Corinthians the doctrine of the
resurrection. He asked: 'Else what shall they do which are baptized for
the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for
the dead' (I. Cor. xv: 29). It is clear from this that the Corinthian
saints understood baptism for the dead better than the resurrection of
the dead. We do not, however, depend on that Scripture or any other
ancient writing for this doctrine. It has been revealed from heaven in
these latter days, and everything pertaining to that sacred ordinance
has been made known; and the temples which have been erected by the
saints in Zion, at immense cost, have been reared with a special view
to the solemnization of ordinances in behalf of the dead."

"But what will become of people who reject what you call the one only
plan of salvation? Will they be doomed to eternal woe? Do you believe
in everlasting punishment?"

"Everlasting punishment is God's punishment. That is to say, as God is
eternal and His law is eternal, there is punishment eternally ready for
the transgressor. But the justice and mercy of God are also eternal.
Therefore as every man is to be judged according to his works (Rev. xx:
12), those who are worthy of many stripes will receive their measure of
that eternal punishment, and those who are worthy only of a few stripes
will receive but their portion. Some will be forgiven in this world
through repentance and obedience, others in the next world, and some
will have to pay the uttermost farthing. (Luke xii: 47-48; Matt, v: 26;
I. Tim. v: 24; Matt, xii: 32; I. John v: 16.) They who sin against the
Holy Ghost by denying it after having received it, who wilfully sin
against light and truth and become fully possessed of the evil one so
that they cannot repent, are 'sons of perdition' for whom there is no
redemption. They are doomed with the devil and his angels forever. All
the rest will be brought forth in the due time of the Lord in the ages
to come and placed in some degree of happiness and glory."

"Do you believe then that there will be different degrees of glory in
heaven?"

"I certainly do. Will not justice so determine? Is not every man to
be judged according to his works? Would it be right for the good,
the true, the just and the pure to reap no fruit from their tree of
righteousness? Is not every soul better for the doing of that which is
right, and the worse for the doing of that which is wrong, and will God
be less fair {116} and equitable than man? Have you not read what Paul
says: 'There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon,
and another glory of the stars. For one star differeth from another
star in glory; so also is the resurrection of the dead?' (I. Cor. xv:
41-42.) The glory of the sun, which is the celestial glory, is for
those who receive the gospel, are baptized into Christ, remain faithful
to the end, overcome all things, and therefore inherit all things, come
forth in the first resurrection and are made kings and priests unto God
and His Christ forever (Rev. xx: 4-6). They become like the Father and
the Son, dwell in their presence and partake of their glory."

"What do you mean by that? How can man be like God? Is He not a spirit
without form, immaterial and incomprehensible?"

"That is a dogma of spurious Christianity, mingled with vain
philosophy. Jesus Christ was the express image of the Father. Man also
is made in the image of the Father and the Son. Jesus Christ, after
His resurrection, when he ascended to the Father, was in the same form
and shape and appearance as when in mortality. Those who are in Christ
are to be like him in every respect. (Heb. i: 3; I. John iii: 1-2;
Phil, iii: 21.) God is a spirit; so also is man. (Job xxxii: 8.) But
the Father is a person, just as the Son is, one being like the other
in all respects. Jesus is a spirit, dwelling in a spiritual body; the
Father is the same, but the Holy Spirit which proceeds from the Father
and the Son permeates space and by it God is omnipresent. Our Father,
the Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Elder Brother, made
us all after His own image and likeness (Gen. i: 27). It is strange
that professing Christians who regard Jesus Christ as God and admit
His personality, form and tangible shape, are horror-stricken when
the Latter Day Saints declare that God the Father is a similar being,
that statement being borne out by the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments. The Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, though one in
purpose, design and act, are separate and distinct personalities. The
Son came from the Father, prayed to the Father, obeyed the Father,
went back to the Father and sat at His right hand, and sent the Holy
Spirit after He left the earth to be a Comforter to His disciples.
Jesus prayed that all who believed on Him should become one, as He and
the Father are one (John xvii: 20-21). This shows that the unity of the
Godhead is not identity of person, as many believe, and it is clear
to those who understand, that Our Heavenly Father is an individual,
just as Christ is, and we shall all be when brought into their {117}
presence. We worship the Father, in the name of the Son, under the
influence of the Holy Ghost, and expect to fully comprehend them all
in the future and perfect state. This is life eternal, that they might
know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent'
(John xvii: 3)."

"You have spoken of the atonement of Christ for the sins of mankind,
and yet you insist upon baptism for the remission of sins. How do you
reconcile these two doctrines?"

"There is nothing in them at variance with each other. The atonement
of Christ was for two purposes. First, for original sin, that is, the
sin committed by our first parents in the garden of Eden; and second,
for actual sins, that is, those committed by mankind individually.
Atonement for the first is unconditional, for the second it is
conditional. The posterity of Adam had nothing to do with the atonement
for that sin. Its consequence was death, not only to Adam, but to all
his descendants. The atonement will bring life to every creature of
Adam's race. 'For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
made alive.' (I. Cor. xv: 22.) 'The first man Adam was made a living
soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit (verse 45). Jesus
said, 'Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear His voice and shall come forth. They that
have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil unto the resurrection of damnation' (John v: 28-29). This shows
that although every one who died through Adam's fall will be raised
from the dead through Christ's atonement, 'some will be raised to
everlasting life and some to shame and everlasting contempt' (Daniel
xii: 2). This is because the atonement for actual sins committed by
mankind was made conditionally, that is, conditioned on their reception
of Jesus Christ as their Savior, manifested by obedience to His Gospel.
The righteous and the wicked will all be raised from the dead, but they
will then all be judged according to their works. 'He that believeth
and is baptized shall be saved; he that believeth not shall be damned'
(Mark xvi: 16). Remission of sin comes through the atonement. 'Without
the shedding of blood there is no remission of sin' Heb. ix: 22). But
this remission is given in baptism preceded by repentance and faith.
The first condition is faith in Christ, the second is repentance, the
third is baptism. That baptism is for the remission of sins. (See
Mark i: 4; Acts ii: 37-38; I. Pet. iii: 21.) That is why baptism is
essential and why Jesus told Nicodemus: 'Except a man be born of water
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God' (John iii:
5). The baptized, {118} repentant believer receives remission of sins,
is a new creature and ready for the reception of the Holy Ghost or
birth of the spirit. This, as I have explained to you, is conferred by
the laying on of hands by men having divine authority. Thus you see
remission of sins is through the atonement, but is given in baptism.
And thus there is no discrepancy between the two doctrines."

"But how do you understand this scripture, and others to the same
purport, 'God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son,
that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life?' (John iii: 16.) Does not that show that belief in Christ is
alone sufficient for salvation?"

"No, it does not, for verse 5 of the same chapter from which you quote
makes birth of water and of the spirit essential. The key to this
whole question is in the meaning of belief in Christ. Jesus said: 'He
that believeth on Me, the works that I do shall he do also' (John xiv:
12). He also said: 'Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven but he that doeth the will of
my Father which is in heaven.' Also he said: 'Every one that heareth
these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a
foolish man which built his house upon the sand' (Matthew vii: 21-27).
'Faith without works is dead, and it is only by works that faith is
made manifest' (James ii: 17-26). Belief in Christ comprehends belief
in His doctrine, manifested by obedience to His gospel. Any other kind
of faith is spurious, dead and of no effect. Peter proclaimed Christ's
gospel, being full of the Holy Ghost, and he taught the people first
to believe in Christ, and when they showed faith and asked what they
should do, he answered: 'Repent and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost' (Acts ii: 37-38). If Peter had
been a modern minister, he would have said in answer to the question,
'Men and brethren, what shall we do?'--as may be heard from almost
every pulpit nowadays, 'Poor sinners, you can do nothing; Christ has
done it all. Only believe and you shall be saved and heaven is yours
forever.' But Peter taught Christ's gospel, which is a gospel of good
works, proceeding from living faith. When Christ sent him and the other
apostles to proclaim that gospel he said: 'Go ye, therefore, and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you' (Matt, xxviii: 19-20).

{119} "Paul is supposed to be the author of the doctrine of salvation
by faith alone without works. But by reading his epistle to the Romans,
which is quoted chiefly in that direction, it will be seen that it was
the works of the law of Moses that Paul showed were insufficient, and
that the first essential to salvation was faith in Christ, but not a
dead faith; it was one that led to obedience, as Christ taught: 'Man
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out
of the mouth of God' (Matthew iv: 4). And that Paul believed in the
efficacy of good works, Romans ii: 3-10, of which I shall quote but
two verses: 'Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that doth
evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. But glory, honor and
peace to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the
Gentile.' There is nothing, in my opinion, so conducive to sin as the
absurd and anti-Christian doctrine that mere belief in the atonement of
Christ will absolve people of the grossest sins and crimes and fit them
for the presence of Him who is pure and holy. It is a soul-destroying
heresy, the invention of men and contrary to ancient as well as modern
revelation."

"It is generally supposed that the Mormons have lax ideas of morality
and peculiar marriage customs. What is the truth of these charges?''

"There are no people in the world who have stricter ideas and rules
concerning morality than the Latter Day Saints have. Sexual relations
outside of marriage are considered a deadly sin. Violations of chastity
are viewed as next to murder in enormity. Chastity is enjoined upon
both male and female. A young man should be as pure as a young woman.
One has no more license than the other as to morals under Mormon
teachings. We believe that the union of the sexes in marriage is
essential to perfection. 'Neither is the man without the woman, neither
the woman without the man, in the Lord' (I. Cor. xi: 11). The celestial
kingdom where God and Christ dwell is a state of perfection. Those
who enter into that glory will be perfect. Therefore we believe in
celestial marriage, which is eternal marriage--the marriage that was
solemnized between Adam and Eve by the Almighty in the Garden of Eden.
They were immortal beings. Death had not entered into the world. There
was no sin, therefore there was no death. The immortal pair were made
one flesh. No man could put them asunder. That was an eternal union.
If they were separated by death, which was the wages of sin, they were
reunited through the atonement of the Savior, and thus restored to
their former condition. So, in the {120} resurrection they will not
be married or given in marriage, for they were united in celestial
marriage before they became mortal. The Lord has revealed in this age
of the world that order of celestial or eternal marriage, so that what
is sealed by it on earth is sealed in heaven, and remains in and after
the resurrection. The husband will be restored to the wife and the wife
to the husband, and together as one they will enter, if worthy, into
the fulness of the glory of the Lord. If a man thus married should
temporarily lose his wife by death, and should marry another by the
same law, they would both be his in the world to come. Previous to the
enactment of laws forbidding polygamy and punishing it as a crime,
the church taught the doctrine of plural marriage, and to a small
extent comparatively it was practiced under the most sacred covenants
and obligations of chastity and purity. But since those laws, after
much litigation and much suffering on the part of many persons, were
declared constitutional by the supreme court of the United States the
practice of marrying more than one wife, in violation of our laws, has
ceased; the President of our church issued a Manifesto to this effect.
No matter what may be preached or published to the contrary, what I say
to you is the truth, which you can depend upon. Polygamous or plural
marriages are forbidden by the constitution of the state of Utah and a
penalty of $500 fine and five years imprisonment is imposed upon those
who violate this provision. One of our doctrines is that we must obey
the constitutional laws of the land. We, therefore, submit and leave
the result with the Lord. But what God hath joined together, no man
can put asunder. Therefore, marriages solemnized by His authority and
commandment will continue, if the parties are faithful, in this world
and in the world to come. But the parties are under solemn obligations
to preserve themselves for each other only, and sexual crimes and
immoralities are viewed by the Latter Day Saints with the utmost
abhorrence."

"What about heaven and hell? Do you believe when people die they go
either to heaven or to hell, or do you deny hell and disbelieve in a
devil?"

"We believe in a personal Satan, as we believe in a personal Deity.
The being who deceived Eve and tempted Jesus is a fallen spirit, the
embodiment of the principle of evil as God is the embodiment of all
that is good. A principle in the abstract is of no force or effect.
There must be some being through which it is manifest. We do not
believe in the mythological evil one with horns and hoofs, nor in a
literal bottomless pit of fire and brimstone. But we believe that
there {121} are many evil spirits who, under that being called the
devil and Satan, tempt human beings and lead them astray if possible,
and who are enemies to Christ and to the truth. They will eventually
be banished from this earth when Christ's work of salvation is made
complete. Hell is a place and condition of torment, in which the
suspense and remorse and anguish of soul of the wicked, waiting for
judgment and not knowing what their fate will be, is as 'the worm that
dieth not and the fire that is not quenched.' This they will endure
as long as justice demands, and until they repent and turn to God and
are perfectly willing to obey Him. When they are released, in future
ages, their destiny will be as they have fixed it themselves by their
own acts and according to the eternal principles of justice and mercy
extended by the all-wise Judge, the eternal Father. We believe in
heaven as a place and a condition. This earth, when it is redeemed and
restored to its paradisaic state, will be a heaven. Sin, darkness,
sorrow, pain and death will be banished from it. The righteous in
their glorified, resurrected state will dwell upon it in everlasting
peace and joy. After it has been purified with fire and made a new
earth, righteousness will dwell in it. The thorn and the brier having
departed, the fig tree and the myrtle tree will bloom and bear fruit in
the place thereof. The enmity between man and brute will be no more.
There will be nothing to hurt or destroy. The flowers of Eden will
blossom, the tree of life will bear its glorious fruits, the river of
life will flow forth from the throne of God; the globe itself will be
as a sea of glass mingled with fire. Christ will dwell upon it as King;
the Father will visit it and grace it with His presence. Everything
that is upon it, above it, around it and beneath it will be sanctified,
beautiful and glorified, and praise to God and the Lamb will ascend
from every part and from every creature, Satan and his hosts will be
vanquished, and Adam and his posterity will be redeemed from the curse
and everything that hath breath will glorify the great Creator; every
knee will bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Lord, to the
glory of God the Father, and He will be all in all."

{122}



TWO LETTERS TO A BAPTIST MINISTER.

_Rev. J. Whitcomb Brougher, pastor First Baptist Church, Chattanooga,
Tenn., delivered two sermons from his pulpit upon "Mormonism". They
were tirades of falsehoods and misrepresentations from beginning to
end; they were filled with much bitterness and hatred, and during one
of his sermons he came as near advocating mob violence as he dared.
These wholesale attacks called out the following open letters to the
minister, which appeared in the Chattanooga News. (There have been many
calls for copies of these letters, and to meet these demands they are
now published in pamphlet form_.)

Chattanooga, Tenn., Dec. 25, 1899.

_Rev. J. Whitcomb Brougher, Chattanooga, Tenn_.

My Dear Sir:--Upon my return from Chicago Friday evening my attention
was called to an article in the Chattanooga _News_ of Dec. 18, 1899,
purporting to be a partial report of a sermon delivered by you, in
your church, the First Baptist, on the the subject of "Mormonism and
Polygamy." I take it from what parties who were present have told
me that the report is substantially correct. I am an Elder in the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in charge of the "Mormon"
Missionary work in the south, headquarters in this city, and as a
representative of the people whom you have without foundation so
unjustly charged with being all that is unholy, I feel it a duty, so
far as possible in a short letter, to disprove your unwarranted attack.
With a desire to be fair I hope, as a matter of justice, that you will
deign to read and consider what follows as a reply to the very unkind
things you have said about an honest, God-fearing people. There are two
sides to every question, and the good book, which you claim to take for
your "rule of faith and practice," says he that judgeth a matter before
he heareth it is not wise.

It is apparent, from the newspaper report, that you are either woefully
ignorant of what the world is pleased to nickname Mormonism, or else
you are filled with prejudice and {123} prompted by sinister motives.
Certainly no intelligent, fair-minded person would make the statements
attributed to you on that Sunday evening, in this enlightened age, if
only a casual investigation of the subject in hand had been made. We
admit that, like the Saints 1800 years ago, we are everywhere spoken
evil against, and your sermon has the appearance of being conceived
in the gall of bitterness, and contains all the earmarks of certain
tracts that have been written and widely distributed by our enemies.
The _News_ stated you handled the subject without gloves, and I trust
that if occasionally, in the course of this letter, I exhibit the bare
knuckles, you will not be offended. I assure you that my only desire
in writing this is to set you right, if you are after truth, on the
question of salvation; and to correct the general impression "can
any good come out of Nazareth" created against my people by the many
falsehoods circulated about them.

Your first misstatement is that "Mormonism is based on a tissue of
lies." Did you have the Bible in view when you said this, or where did
you obtain the information? Had you, before delivering your sermon,
ever conversed with a "Mormon?" Have you ever read any of our works,
treating on the founding and the fundamental principles of the religion
you are seeking to belittle and trample in the mire? You failed to
quote any authority for this extraordinary assertion, and surely you
would not go to the writings of a Methodist minister, or the writing of
some enemy of Mormonism, as authority on our belief. If you wished to
learn of the Catholic faith would it be fair to obtain your information
from a Presbyterian clergyman? In all fairness should not the rule
you apply to others apply to us? You have simply quoted from our
enemies. By using that rule of reasoning we can even do away with the
resurrection of the Master, for did not the Roman soldiers say that
Christ was not resurrected, but that while they slept the friends of
the Redeemer came and stole the body away? Only the friends of Christ
said He was risen, and you build your faith on what our Savior and His
friends said. In handling this question why did you not take the Bible,
"the rule of your faith and practice," and expose "Mormonism" principle
by principle? Perhaps you have profited by the experience of others
before you and are too wise to undertake such a large contract? Our
faith would be popular today if it had only a form of godliness, and we
defy you or any other man to prove from the Bible, or the great book of
reason, that "Mormonism is based on a tissue of lies."

You say that Joseph Smith was an idle, vicious disreputable {124}
young man, etc. Again, we ask from what source did you receive your
information? Again the answer comes back, from our enemies. Joseph
Smith was an honest, sober, industrious young man, and we furnish just
as many reputable witnesses to this effect as you can furnish that he
was the embodiment of all that was bad. Why, the enemies of our Savior
said He was a winebibber, a blasphemer, etc. Did that prove Him such?
In the case of Christ you would answer no, but in the case of Joseph
Smith we presume you would say yes. According to a brass tablet, found
in the year 1280 among a quantity of records of the Kingdom of Naples,
in the city of Aquilla, Pontius Pilate sentenced Jesus to be nailed to
the cross for six reasons, as follows:

    "1. Jesus is a disturber of the peace.

    "2. Jesus has taught the people sedition.

    "3. Jesus is an enemy of the laws.

    "4. Jesus calls Himself the Son of God.

    "5. Jesus calls Himself the King of Israel.

    "6. Jesus disturbed the worship of the temple by leading a mob of
    people with palms in their hands."

This sounds very much like the usual charges made against Joseph Smith
and the Mormon Elders, at the present time, does it not? Joseph Smith
sealed his testimony with his blood. He was dragged before the courts
of the land, by his enemies, some forty-eight times, and the courts
always pronounced him not guilty. Go to the court records and see. His
enemies admitted they could not reach him through the law, and declared
that powder and ball should.

Evidently you have heard of the Book of Mormon, for you mention it.
Get one and read it, and then you will be better able to tell what
the Latter-day Saints claim for that sacred book. You claim the Book
of Mormon found its origin in the old Solomon Spaulding MSS. Your
reference to this long since exploded theory as accounting for this
book gives one who is the least bit informed a key to the ancientness
of the falsehoods from which you preached your sermon. After you have
read the Book of Mormon go to Oberlin college, Oberlin, O., and there
examine the old Spaulding MSS., and compare the two; then, if you are
wise, you will never rehash that old dried up argument again. The Book
of Mormon does not conflict in points of doctrine with the Bible, and
it gives a history of the people who once inhabited this continent,
accounting for the origin of the American Indians.

{125} You again display your ignorance of the subject in hand when you
say that we place Joseph Smith above Jesus Christ. A greater falsehood
never was told, but we are pleased to inform you that we believe Joseph
Smith to be a Prophet of God, and that he was the instrument in the
hand of God in restoring again the Gospel to earth. Is this a crime? If
we believed more in Joseph Smith than in Jesus, would we not have named
the church after him, as some of our enemies have named theirs after
their founders, instead of calling it the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints? You know on one occasion the Saints were asking Paul
about the second coming of our Savior, and Paul, in second Thes. 2:
3-4, said that He (Jesus) was not to come until or except there should
be a falling away first, showing that there was to be an apostasy from
the Gospel. Space will not permit me to quote the many other passages
in the Bible proving that there was to be an apostasy, and that in
the latter days a restoration was to take place, as per the dream of
Nebuchadnezzar, interpreted by Daniel, and according to Revelations,
14th chapter, 6th verse, the restoration was to be made by an angel.
Now, if that restoration has not been made, it is yet to be made,
and believers in the Bible at least should be looking for that angel
which was to fly through the midst of heaven. No doubt you believe
that we are living in the latter days, and we ask, is there anything
unreasonable, especially if we consider Holy Writ, in our claiming that
the angel seen by John has flown, appeared to Joseph Smith, and thus
fulfilled the prophecy that the Gospel was to be restored? We can give
you an abundance of Scripture to prove our point, and if you would read
our literature you would have a much more intelligent conception of
"Mormonism and Polygamy." To truth seekers, those who are willing to
lay aside hatred, prejudice, and investigate, we say we are prepared to
give reason and Scripture to prove every doctrine we advocate. Robert
Ingersoll says, in his "Best Argument Against Christianity," that there
is more proof for the miracles of Joseph Smith than there is for those
performed by Christ.

Another proposition laid down by you is "Its doctrines are likewise

PERNICIOUS AND BLASPHEMOUS."

Then you quote from the Journal of Discourses and dilate upon our
belief in the materiality of God, etc. We are very sorry to know that
you deny the existence of a God that is to some extent comprehensible,
and you again make yourself ridiculous in the eyes of those who know
something of both {126} sides of the question. You put it down as
blasphemy to believe it possible that we, the children (remember
children) of God, can become like unto our Father. Did you ever analyze
"Our Father which art in heaven?" Your "rule of faith and practice"
says man was created in the image of God. It further says that Jesus,
our elder brother, was in the image of God, so much so that He said
"he that hath seen me hath seen the Father." Why did He say this?
Because Jesus was in the "express image" of the Father, and in seeing
one, we would virtually see the other. Jesus had flesh and bones, a
body like ours, and the Bible informs us that He ascended into heaven
after His resurrection, having the same body that He had at the time
of His crucifixion. Jesus was so much like other men that He was
called the carpenter's son, and for daring to say He was the Son of
God His enemies hanged Him on the cross. Now, as Jesus was like we
are, and is like we are, having a body of flesh and bones, and is in
the express image of the Father, must not God have a body of flesh and
bones? How will you twist the Scripture to make Him out otherwise? What
do you think of Jesus becoming so corrupt as to eat fish after His
resurrection? Are you prepared to say He did not? Do you remember that
the angel said (Acts 1: 11), "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven?" Jesus
went away into heaven with a body of flesh and bones. Do you think He
will return, as promised, with a body of flesh and bones, or do you
think He will be just a shadow? Now, is it blasphemy, according to
Scripture, to believe God to be a tangible being, with body, parts
and passions? Are we criminals, and to be ostracized from society,
for believing in the Bible? We refer to a living, practical belief.
In your researches of the Bible perhaps you have relied too much on
"Commentaries" (private interpretations of the Scripture), and if you
will call at our office we will be pleased to point out to you many
essential truths which apparently have escaped your notice, and which
space will not permit giving in this short communication.

You will remember that the "wise men" took issue with Jesus, and that
He chose the illiterate fisherman to be His chief Apostle. Is it not
possible that the "wise men" of today might learn wisdom pertaining to
salvation from the humble "Mormon" Elder? Pardon the digression. I said
that you denied {127}

THE EXISTENCE OF A GOD,

and if the above is not sufficient I will now prove it to you. You are
in a worse condition than the infidel, because the infidel says "I
don't know," while a definition of your God implies a pure and simple
"nothing," an "immaterial" being. You charge us with believing in a
material God--"gross materiality" you call it, a God with body parts
and passions, etc., which from what you have read above, you will see
we are pleased to acknowledge. From your charge we can take it in no
other way, and arrive at no other conclusion than that you believe in
a God without body, parts and passions, and as the definition goes,
nowhere present yet everywhere present, etc. The definition of your God

REMINDS ME OF A STORY.

At a circus one clown asked a brother clown if he had ever seen
"nothing." The answer was in the negative. Well, says the first, I
will show it to you; shut your eyes. The second shut his eyes and
the first said: "What do you see?" The answer came "nothing." "Just
as I expected," said the first; "you have seen it, open your eyes."
Now, Brother Brougher, shut your eyes and what do you see? "Nothing,"
of course; well, that's him. The mysterious Santa Claus is "not in
it" with such a being. Let me ask now seriously, can you conceive of
anything "immaterial?" Pray how are we to know a being without a body,
parts or passions? John says it is life eternal to know God, but it
is a puzzler to figure out how we can know a being that is everywhere
present and yet nowhere present. Are you not mistaken? Of course the
things of God are understood by the Spirit of God, but it surely would
take a very strong pair of spiritual spectacles to see a being that is
nowhere present, without parts or body to see. Perhaps you will turn
away from this in disgust, and impatiently say that I don't understand
the beauty of your God, but how can I understand the beauty if it has
none? Can you figure anything but zero out of it? Come, be honest (if
you can't be decent), and forsake your idol.

There are many passages in the Bible to prove that

GOD HAS A BODY, PARTS AND PASSIONS,

flesh and bones, just as have His children. For instance, Adam heard
the voice of the Lord, Gen. 3: 9-10. He must have a voice. God talked
with Noah, Gen. 8: 13-21, and remembered, Noah, 8-1. So He must have a
mouth, tongue and a memory. {128} Abraham ate and talked with the Lord,
Gen. 18. Jacob saw God face to face. Moses talked to Him as one speaks
with a friend, Ex. 33-11. Moses saw His back parts, Ex. 23; the heavens
are the works of Thine hands, Heb. 1: 10; and John says in Revelation,
first chapter, that God has a head, and that He has hair like wool.
From these passages we learn that God has a face, back parts, head,
hair, hands, etc., and it ought to be conclusive evidence of God being
a reasonable being. Then the Bible is full of passages telling us of
the love, mercy, hatred, etc., of our Father in heaven, which are all
passions, are they not? We have only referred to a few quotations
on this point, but before closing the subject I cannot refrain from
quoting Deut. 4: 28, which says "that the time should come when the
children of Israel should so far degrade themselves as to worship gods,
the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see nor hear,
nor eat nor smell." Can you get any inference from this Scripture other
than that God is possessed of all these faculties? Are you certain you
are not an Israelite, come to fulfill the above prophecy? Can you show
one passage of Scripture to prove that God has neither body, parts, nor
passions? No, you cannot.

You make the terrible charge that

WE BELIEVE IN MANY GODS.

We solemnly plead guilty to believing in many Gods. If this is a crime
it is time for a new translation of the Holy Scriptures. Does not the
good book say "and God said, let us make man in our own image?" What
are you going to do with the words "us" and "our" in this Scripture?
Does this not prove a plurality of Gods? Ex. 15-11 says "who is like
unto Thee, O Lord, among the gods?" Deut. 10-17: "Lord, your God is God
of gods and Lord of lords." Paul also refers to the King of Kings and
the Lord of Lords, 1 Tim. 6-15, also see 2 Chron. 2-5, Psalms 86-8,
Dan. 2-47, Dan. 4-8, Dan. 11-36. If you desire any more Scripture
on this subject we will be pleased to give you chapter and verse.
Notwithstanding we believe that there are many Gods, we worship only
one God, the Father of Jesus Christ. Our enemies do not put it in this
light, do they? The Devil is anxious to have you believe a lie and be
damned.

You next prate about "Mormonism" being

"A SYSTEM OF LUST"

and that "social purity" is almost an unknown quantity in {129} Utah,
and sing the old familiar song about polygamy. Don't you think you
could do better by looking closer to home? If the truth were known
you would probably find more polygamy (on the European plan) than
ever was known among the Mormons (on the Patriarchal plan). In fact,
you say adultery and fornication are destroying the nation. We agree
with you that these evils exist to an alarming extent, but most
emphatically deny that there is any more cause, at least, to make the
Mormons a special object of purity work than there is to purify other
communities. If Mormonism is indeed a monster, as you claim, and if
social purity, as you assert, is almost unknown among us, then what a
horrible condition the Mormon people must be in. But stay; the Master
says "By their fruits ye shall know them." Mormonism goes into the
entire civilized world, and in this age, as in the days of Christ, it
is the poor, and you will claim the ignorant, who embrace it. Very
well, Mormonism takes them to a place where you claim social purity is
almost unknown; what a horrible condition these poor, ignorant, deluded
creatures must be in in a few years.

Now, listen, Brother Brougher: 90 per cent, of the Mormon people

LIVE IN THEIR OWN HOMES

and upon their own farms. Utah stands equal to Massachusetts in
education--the rate of illiteracy is about 3 per cent. She stands
head and shoulders above 90 per cent, of the states in the union when
it comes to educational facilities, and until the advent of what you
call civilization came to Christianize us poor heathens, there were no
brothels or saloons in Utah. And yet, social purity, you say, is almost
unknown among us. I leave the public to judge the tree by its fruits,
and in passing your wholesale libel upon men, women and children,
will drop you by saying "from the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh." To your heart let me say "thou shalt not lie," and "thou
shalt not bear false witness," while to your mouth let me prescribe
soap and water. I do not care to

DISCUSS POLYGAMY

with you, because there is a law in Tennessee against teaching it,
and punishing those who do teach it; we should obey the law, and
right here let me inform you that the twelfth article of our faith
reads: "We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers,
and magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law." This
part of our religion is taught and as carefully kept as any other
part of our religion. However, {130} Roberts will be cast out of
the House of Representatives, and you ministers who are to receive
congratulations for accomplishing this mighty victory over B. H.
Roberts should keep your sleeves rolled up until you succeed in also
banishing the polygamous Bible from the national headquarters. The
Bible teaches polygamy, and, looking through your eyeglasses, is
therefore antagonistic to the "purity of the American home," and a law
breaker, in the state of Tennessee. I enter this complaint against the
Divine record, and will now proceed to convict the prisoner at the bar.
In accusing the Bible of being antagonistic to purity in the American
home, by charging that it teaches polygamy, I ask that, in addition
to the evidence which I shall produce, all the evidence introduced
against Roberts be accepted and made a part of the case. Now, if I can
establish that the Bible is a teacher of polygamy, I contend I have
made my case, and ask that the law be enforced and the offending parts
of the Bible cast out.

Abraham was a polygamist and the friend of God. God knew he was a
polygamist when He made him His friend. Jacob had four wives, and their
polygamous sons, we are informed, are to be honored by having their
names inscribed over the pearly gates of the beautiful city. Suppose
you were to fool Saint Peter and get into heaven, how would you feel
clasped to the bosom of the polygamous Abraham? Do you suppose that you
can sufficiently humble yourself to go in at one of those polygamous
gates and mingle with the polygamous sons of Jacob? Moses had more than
one wife, and yet he was a Prophet of God. Just think of a polygamist
leading the chosen people of the Lord. All the Judges of Israel and all
her chosen kings which were appointed by God, including Saul, David and
Solomon, were polygamists, and the descendants of these polygamists
were highly honored of the Lord. The Prophet Samuel, and even Jesus,
our Saviour, came through polygamous lineage. The Bible also says
that polygamous relations shall exist in the last days when men would
become decimated, that their scarcity would cause seven women to take
hold of one man and desire to be called by his name to take away their
reproach, Isa. 4-1. Are we not informed that David did not sin except
in the case of Uriah, the Hittite? Did not the Lord say through Nathan
the prophet that He, the Lord, had given David Saul's wives? If all
these parties could find favor with God, although they were polygamists
and God knew it, would it be unscriptural to believe that polygamists
might find favor with our Heavenly Father in these days? The Bible does
not say that we shall have no more than one wife, {131} and can we get
anything else out of these instances than that the Bible sanctions
polygamy? Of course you will say that Paul says a Bishop is to be the
husband of one wife, but we ask does he say a Bishop cannot have more
than one wife? Now, from these passages of Scripture, I ask that the
prisoner, the Bible, be convicted and be punished under the laws of
Tennessee.

We are charged with being

"DISLOYAL AND UN-AMERICAN."

To substantiate this statement would you bring forth the record of the
famous Utah batteries in the Philippines? Or would you point to the
Mormon battalion in the war with Mexico, or to the raising of the Stars
and Stripes on Ensign Peak, when the Mormon Pioneers entered Salt Lake
valley? Kindly furnish proof. Your rule of faith and practice says "by
their fruits ye shall know them," and we are perfectly willing to be
judged by that rule, in loyalty as in all other things.

To create a greater impression upon your hearers, I am also informed
that you said we would be willing to pay the railroad fare of any of
the fair mothers and daughters of this land to Utah, if they could but
be induced to identify themselves with the "monstrous and destroying
system." Did you believe that when you said it? We again ask for proof.
Remember that the burden of proof falls on the accuser. This is only
another of the falsehoods circulated about the Latter-day Saints, and
you cannot point to a single instance. We do not coax, or persuade,
or inveigle people into our church. We lay before them the principles
of the Gospel, and if they want to accept them, all well and good, we
rejoice over it; but if they do not choose to accept it, we do not send
them to the bottom of a bottomless pit, there to fall into a lake of
fire and brimstone and burn, and sizzle and fry forever and forever.
Your hell is as big a monstrosity as your God. Incomprehensible,
unfathomable, beyond the bounds of time and space, reason and
everything else.

I must not forget the preface of your remarks to the effect that there
were some things about the "Mormon" church that

MUST BE GIVEN UP

before it could be looked upon as a Christian church. What constitutes
a Christian? Is it not one who lives up to the Gospel of Christ? We
are very anxious to be set right; if we are wrong, we would like you
to take your "rule of faith and {132} practice" and point out to us
wherein we differ with the Bible. I have made somewhat of a study of
the teachings of our Savior and would be pleased to have you answer
the following questions, keeping in view the injunction of Isaiah,
"to the law and to the testimony, and if they speak not according to
these words it is because there is no light in them;" also the word of
Paul to the Galatian Saints to the effect that if any man preach any
other Gospel than that which he preached, let him be accursed. First,
where does the Bible give you authority to call your church "The First
Baptist?" In Ephesians 5: 23-24 it is recorded as wives take husbands'
names, so the church takes the Savior's name (Jesus Christ); how do you
harmonize that passage with the name of your church? Can you find any
other name given God's people than "Saints" of the Most High?

WHO CALLED YOU TO PREACH?

Paul says, Heb. 5-4, "and no man taketh this honor unto himself but
he that is called of God as was Aaron." Remember Paul says "no man,"
and you know Aaron was called by revelation through a Prophet of God.
Were you called by a Prophet of God? If you say the Bible gives you
authority to preach, then "any man" can get a Bible and thereby have
authority to preach, baptize and minister in the ordinances of the
Gospel.

On the same principle, and with as much propriety, I could purchase a
law book and set myself up to be a justice of the peace, or Governor of
Tennessee. Is this not so? "Now, therefore, ye are no more strangers
and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief corner-stone in whom all
the building fitly framed together groweth into an holy temple in the
Lord." (Eph. 2: 1.8-21.) No one will dispute that the foundation of
Apostles and Prophets is revelation. Christ said to Peter: "Upon this
rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it." Is your church founded on revelation--living, modern,
and not dead? "And He gave some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; and
some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God, etc. (Eph. 4.) Have you Prophets and
Apostles in your church? These officers were {133} to remain in the
church until "we all" come into a unity of the faith.

ARE WE TO A UNITY?

Surely you and I are not in a unity of the faith, and what about the
hundreds of other denominations claiming to be the true followers
of Christ? Do we need perfecting and edifying? If so, we must need
Prophets, and Apostles, and all the other officers mentioned by Paul,
to perfect us, and to keep us from being driven and tossed to and fro
by every wind of doctrine. Can you find any Scripture changing this
order of things? You cannot.

Do you believe that signs shall follow the believers, as recorded in
Mark, 16th chapter? We have no record of this promise to the believers
being repealed, and Paul says (I Cor., 13th chapter), that spiritual
gifts were to remain in the church until that which is perfect is come.
Has perfection come? Peter says (Acts 2: 38) that baptism is for the
remission of sins. Do you believe it?

You teach that

BAPTISM IS NOT ESSENTIAL

to salvation, and that it is only an outward sign of an inward grace.
Jesus says, Mark 16: 16: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved: but he that believeth not (and consequently is not baptized)
shall be damned."

Peter commanded the people on the day of Pentecost to be baptized.
Peter was the chief Apostle and had the power to bind on earth and it
should be bound in heaven. Does this not make baptism a command of God?
If it is a command of God is it not essential to salvation? If this is
not essential, why not do away with that part of the commission which
commands His disciples to go and preach? Are you sure the teachings of
your church are in strict accord with the Divine record?

James says, 5: 14-16: "Is any sick among you, let him call for the
Elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anoint him with oil
in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick,
and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they
shall be forgiven him." Do you call for the Elders? You took for

YOUR SUBJECT LAST NIGHT

"If Christ should come to Chattanooga, where would He go?" Now, Brother
Brougher, stand up. If He should come, where would He go? He commanded
that His Gospel should be {134} made free and His ministers should
travel without purse or scrip. If He were hunting for His friends,
would He call upon those who declare that His promises have fallen
to the ground unfulfilled, and that the blessings do not follow the
believers? He has placed Apostles and Prophets in the church, with
a decree that they should remain until we all come to a unity of
the faith. Would He call those His friends who declare "they are no
longer needed and are not to remain until we all come to a unity of
the faith?" He told the generation to whom He came (1800 years ago)
that their great sin consisted in worshiping dead Prophets, while they
persecuted those who believed in living oracles. Would He call on those
who engage in the same business today? He never resorted to abuse
for an argument. If He came would He love those who do? He was not a
character assassin. Would He love those who are? But stay, we do not
know where He would go, or whom He would call upon, because when He was
here before, He said: "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners,
to repentance," and He might say that His mission was not entirely
finished, and we cannot tell where He would go, but you might possibly
see him.

Now, Brother Brougher, just a word. Did you ever listen to an argument
against "Mormons" from the standpoint of Scripture and reason? No, you
never have and you never will. Did it ever occur to you that it was a
most cowardly ambition which induces you to attack a party in a place
and at a time when retaliation would have been anything but decent? If
so, will you grant us the privilege of defending ourselves from the
pulpit and before that congregation which were so disgraced by your
tirade on Sunday evening?

Now, in conclusion, let me say that we are not here to stir up strife,
but we propose to defend ourselves whenever attacked; so I close,
wishing you a merry Christmas and a happy New Year.

BEN. E. RICH.

Chattanooga, Tenn., Dec. 25, 1899.

_Rev. (?) J. Whitcomb Brougher, Chattanooga, Tenn_.

My Dear Sir:--Your second installment of abuse, falsehood and
misrepresentation, called "Is Mormonism Anti-Christian," I see, by the
_News_ of Jan. 1, was duly delivered, as per previous announcement.
As some well-meaning people might take your performance in earnest,
I hope you will take it in {135} good part if I make a brief reply
before the incident is closed. I am glad that this is a country
of free speech, free thought, and religious liberty, even though
narrow-minded religious bigots cannot comprehend this basic principle
of our heaven-born government, and sometimes abuse it. American history
tells us that during the revolutionary days of America's struggle for
independence the British once had Gen. Marion and his little band of
struggling patriots surrounded; that the British, in order to tantalize
the starving patriots, fired wheat from their cannon into the American
camp, and as I have authentic evidence of having descended from one
of those hungry defenders of the flag, and also that I have proof,
beyond truthful contradiction, that my progenitor was once a member
of George Washington's body guard, I trust you will have no serious
objections to my calling myself an American by birth, and entitled to
a small portion of the freedom of speech and thought guaranteed to
Americans by our constitution. Should there be any objections upon
the possible ground that your progenitors possibly have been on the
other side of that fight, I pray you to let family feuds, for this
occasion at least, be buried. No people on earth love liberty and true
Americanism more than my people, and no people realize to a greater
extent that the favorite weapons brought against truth are, generally,
ridicule and billingsgate; and in a vain attempt to successfully answer
my former letter you liberally employed this unsavory method with the
hope of laughing the case out of court. We have not been accustomed to
throwing mud in order to bolster up our cause, but in this case, if
I should stoop to a little ridicule, avoiding slush, I hope you and
the public will pardon me. I understand from parties who witnessed
your performance last Sunday night, that the recital of your little
piece would have done much credit to a Punch and Judy show; but, shorn
of its stagey effects and set in cold type, without even a moving
picture accompaniment, I hope that I may be forgiven if I do not fully
appreciate the force of your masterful (?) logic. I have no doubt
that the thinking people of this city can, without any assistance,
distinguish between inflated sophistic bombast, and logic; but a little
airing and brushing always takes away the mold, removes the rubbish and
gives things a more healthful appearance. Now, as the physician said to
his patient, "just hold still, and I will not insert the knife deeper
than is absolutely necessary."

You claim to be a true representative of the meek and lowly Master, who
said He "came not to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance."
You are loud in condemning "us" as {136} sinners; yet you said, in
your letter to the News, announcing your attack upon me and my faith,
that you were not here to convert the Latter-day Saints, that the work
was not worth the candle. How very Christ-like! What a humble follower
of the Lamb, and how faithfully you endeavor to follow the example of
the Master, who said there was more joy in heaven over one sinner who
repenteth than over ninety and nine that needed no repentance; but
pardon me--I had forgotten that we are now living in modern times, and
are told by such eminent divines as yourself that the Bible does not
mean what it says.

In the same letter, mentioned above, you also declare you are not here
for the purpose of proselyting, which means, of course, that you do not
intend to waste your time by calling anyone to repentance. In view of
this, may I ask, is your mission here simply to love Jesus for $1,800
per year, and not for a blessed cent less? Great man! Paul told Timothy
that the time would come when they would heap to themselves teachers,
having itching ears, and I suppose it becomes necessary, in order that
these words might be fulfilled, for some one to be engaged in tickling
ears, even though it becomes rather expensive. Of course I understand
that the march of progression changes things, and perhaps this doctrine
of Christ, that "the physician is not for the whole but for the sick,"
has evolved as completely as the Golden Rule, for we now have it, at
least to a very large extent, "Do others or they will do you, and do it
first." The theory is just the same as it used to be, but it is only,
as you say, "symbolic or a figure of speech," the practical part having
been done away with--"we have no need of thee."

Through force of habit (we presume), in your brief note to the _News_
you again charged us with creeping into houses and leading captive
silly women, laden with sins, etc. Knowing it impossible to furnish
proof, you hide behind the miserable subterfuge that you have only time
to sound the key of warning. Our challenge still holds good that you
cannot point to a single instance.

You think it a shame and a disgrace that Chattanooga is the
headquarters for our missionary work in the south, and no doubt if
the solid element of this community, as you assert, thought likewise,
you would favor and advocate burning us at the stake. However, as you
are a newcomer here, I feel that you are excusable, in a measure, for
this rash and un-American statement. We know, as well as you, like our
Master and the Former Day Saints, we are not popular, and we can also
take consolation that in the world's history {137} non-conformists to
popular opinion have always been placed in the selfsame category. For
a good many years, over twenty, we have had our headquarters here, and
it is strange that, before your advent, the good people of this city
did not discover that we were a disgrace and a detriment to this city.
During the time we have been located here we have been associated,
in a business way, with not a few representative men of Chattanooga,
and believe we enjoy their confidence as being honest, paying our
bills, etc., and have heard no complaints of any of them missing their
wives or daughters, or of any charge being lodged against any of our
representatives of conduct unbecoming true ladies or gentlemen. Our
expenditures in this city amount to something like $25,000 per year,
and I may be excused for mentioning this item, in that you mentioned
money on Sunday night in various ways. I wish briefly to explain this,
knowing full well your ambition to misjudge and misrepresent us in
this, as in other matters. We have laboring in this mission about 500
Elders, sometimes more and sometimes a little less, and in coming
here they are called from the plow, the smithy, the work-bench, the
machine shop, the counting room, the mine, and the various avocations
of life. Some of them leave lucrative position, worth to them, in some
instances, one or two thousand dollars per year, or more, while others
again are the sons of poor widows and men of humble circumstances
financially, but all willing to battle for the Gospel. Now, these
men leave their homes, all that is dear to a human, and come among
strangers, unto them, a strange land, to preach an unpopular doctrine;
to be hated and despised, sometimes brutally treated, because of their
convictions, traveling without purse or scrip, and depending upon God
to raise up friends to give them a place to sleep and something to
eat. These men give their time to the church free of charge, and pay
their own expenses, such as clothing, railroad fare, literature, etc.,
necessary to carry on their work.

When an Elder arrives in this city he is assigned to his field of
labor, and remains in the field usually from two to three years; when,
in the course of his labors, it is necessary for him to have books,
tracts, clothing, and other supplies, he sends here for us to send
him these needed articles, while the money to pay for the same, if
the Elder is unable to bear the expense himself, is forwarded here by
relatives and friends, or in some cases by brothers and sisters in the
church at his home. This explains how we dispose of money in this city.

Some of our Elders have been shot to death by mobs, some {138} have
been cruelly beaten, while others have died in the harness of natural
causes.

Could you do as these men do for your religion?

Could you stand to be held up to the derision of the world, leave a
comfortable home and work without a salary, derided by such men as
yourself, and your mother charged with being worse than a harlot; all
for the love of the Master's cause?

Some of our Elders now in the field were with the rough riders in
the late war with Spain, others were with the Utah batteries in the
Philippines, and some of them returned home about the time the call to
arms was sounded, in just enough time to discard their Prince Albert
coats and don the uniform of Uncle Sam.

Is this disloyalty? Could you do as much for your religion and your
country?

We try to mind our own business, and if the good people of this city
or any other place do not care to come out and hear me or any other
Mormon Elder preach, that is their business. All I ask is fair play and
nothing more. Giving the people an opportunity to hear the Gospel is
a large part of the mission of a servant of God, and when it has been
preached in all the world for a witness, then shall the end come, then
will it be said, as it was said once before by our Master, "how oft
would I have gathered you, but ye would not." I remember, too, that
Jesus said: "Wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to
destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; while straight is
the gate and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there
be that find it."

Christ also said that people would kill His disciples and think they
were doing God's service, and that all who would follow Him must needs
suffer persecution. Are you persecuted? Is it right to look for the
true Church of Christ in popularity? When a church becomes popular and
persecution ceases, one of the promises of our Savior ceases to be
fulfilled, for persecution is one of the marks by which we are to know
the true church, says the Bible. Don't you think it is time to begin to
look for the cause of the trouble? What do you really sacrifice for the
cause of the Master?

You misunderstand me when you try to make believe that I claim my
arguments are new. They are old, very old, and are the same as those
used by Paul and Peter. I hope you will not misrepresent me on that
point again. They may not be Christian, in the accepted use of the
term today, but, {139} according to Scripture, they were accepted as
Christian over 1,800 years ago.

I did not think I hit so hard when I asked for a chance to give my
side of the story before your congregation; I have always been taught
to hear both sides before passing judgment, and perhaps it might not
be amiss to say here that it is somewhat of a custom among my people
to loan, as you would put it, preachers of other denominations their
churches, congregations, and a choir to sing for them. There would be
no objection even to the Rev. Dr. Talmage, so lovingly quoted by you,
preaching in our great Tabernacle at Salt Lake City, if he desired
to do so, and be furnished with a congregation numbering thousands
and a choir of 500 voices to sing for him. I thought your superior
(?) Christianity would make you as fair and generous as the despised
Mormons, but I see I overestimated you. Our large Tabernacle at Salt
Lake City seats from ten to twelve thousand, our organ is second
largest in the world, and our choir, as I stated above, consists of 500
voices.

We think our singers are of the best, as they were given the second
prize at the world's fair (the first prize being carried off by
the famous Welsh singers). No minister of good character has ever
been denied a hearing in that building, and among the many who have
occupied our famous pulpit I mention the following prominent churchmen,
representing various denominations:

    Bishop Kingsley, of Ohio. Rev. A. N. Fisher, of Nevada. Dr.
    Tiffany, of Iowa. Dr. Allen, of Wyoming. Rev. Hiram McKee, of
    Missouri. Dr. J. H. Vincent, of New York. Gen. Booth, of the
    Salvation Army, London. Mr. D. L. Moody. Dr. Reiner, of New York.

Perhaps these eminent divines would have been refused a hearing had the
Mormon people been as narrow and contracted as some of their enemies.

When you advise your congregation not to go to hear us, is it not good
proof that you are afraid to have your people find out the truth about
us and learn the true nature of our faith?

As expected, you made no effort to expose the principles we teach from
reason and the Scripture; you claim it would take a lifetime to expose
the errors of Mormonism. Well, {140} now, Brother, don't you think you
are a little bit inconsistent? Did you not speak before you thought?
Just think what would be accomplished if you could only prove Mormonism
to be false. We are informed by our enemies, and they preach it to the
people, that the very existence of our government and free institutions
is threatened by this Mormon octopus, and often has it been pointed
out, by preachers and politicians, that we already control four or five
states, almost a sufficient number of senators to give us a balance of
power in the United States senate. Then the Rev. T. C. Iliff, and other
of our enemies, who are proselyting in Utah, say if it were not for our
leaders we would be good people; and that it is our priestcraft that
makes us bad; fully admitting that they think we have a soul to save.
Don't you think you could afford to try and call us to repentance? Is
it not worth the candle? Inasmuch as Dr. Iliff was in this city a few
months back, lecturing on Mormonism, soliciting donations, is it not
possible that some of Chattanooga's good people gave of their means to
be used in converting us "heathens," and no doubt we were considered
"worth the candle?" Would it not be well worth a man's life to prove
Mormonism false, if it would save the nation from going to pieces and
be the means of saving some 300,000 or 400,000 or more souls for Jesus?
Ministers all over the country are crying that thousands are being won
over to the Mormon faith every year, and would it not be worth the
candle to check this mighty stream of human souls, which, as you say,
"are going to certain destruction?"

As to Joseph Smith, you rehashed the same old stuff, which I have
already answered, but I should have thought you would have remembered
to tell the people, in your eagerness to be fair, what such men as
Josiah Quincy, George Bancroft, the historian, and other prominent and
well known men say. In another column we have taken pains to give a few
sayings in our favor from men of undoubted veracity, but as they are
not clippings from your style of authors perhaps they will not suit you.

However, they will go to show that there are two sides to this
question, as well as every other question.

On the Book of Mormon you manufacture another Spaulding story with a
hope of covering your defeat on this point, but we want to say to you
here that the manuscript of Oberlin college is the very manuscript of
which it was falsely said years ago furnished the inspiration for the
Book of Mormon, and as President Fairchild said in his affidavit and
account {141} of the manuscript published in the New York World, the
opponents of Mormonism will have to look elsewhere for an explanation
of the Book of Mormon.

You admitted to two of our young men who called on you a few days ago,
that you had never read anything about us except from our enemies.
Solomon says he that judgeth a matter before he heareth it is not wise.
How Solomon-like you are.

You felt very badly because I did not break the law, so you could
prosecute me for teaching polygamy, didn't you? You remind me of a
booby, who, in playing with his big brother, cried out, "Ma, he won't
let me hit him." Solomon and David both sinned, we admit, but you took
special pains not to tell the audience "when" they transgressed. But
then this was necessary in order to keep your "clay brick" logic from
going to pieces. Does the fact that God has a body, parts and passions,
debar Him from being an intelligent being, omnipresent, etc.? The
glory of God is intelligence, and He, being a real live God, and not
a nonentity, would His materiality prohibit Him from controlling the
intelligences for the just governing of His children and the universe?
Let us look at your syllogism. "A brick is made of clay, a man is made
of clay, therefore a man is a brick." Now let us construct one from
the Bible, taking care to have our premises correct. "All sons are
in the image of their fathers, Jesus was a Son, therefore He was in
the 'express' image of His Father." Now, Brother Brougher, what was
the image of His Father? Jesus had a body of flesh and bones--can you
explain or ridicule it away? If the words "God is a spirit" mean that
He has neither body, parts or passions, then are we to dispense with
our body, parts and passions in order to worship Him in "spirit" and in
truth? When you find some quotation in the Bible that suits your idea,
you seem to be willing to take the words literally. If the symbolical
or figurative parts of the Bible are so plain, why is there such a wide
difference of opinion, among the learned even, as to its teachings? I
remember that Peter declared that "no prophecy of the Scripture is of
any private interpretation." I do not mention this by way of belittling
your great knowledge of interpretation and for calling me a fool for
taking the book literally, but speak of it that the public might know
how ignorant and how very little Peter really knew about how to read
the Bible.

You say Mark 16: 16 is spurious, to justify yourself in not believing
baptism to be essential to salvation, don't you? {142} "Only believe
and you shall be saved;" you may just as well say to the farmer, "only
believe in planting and your crop will grow." But let us see where
your declaration "that this part of the Bible is spurious" leads us.
There are other passages of Scripture which say baptism is essential
to salvation. Are they also spurious? John 3: 5 reports Jesus saying
to Nicodemus, "except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he
cannot enter the kingdom of God." Matthew says, 3: 13-15, that it
was necessary for our Savior to be baptized in order to fulfill all
righteousness. Jesus also says, Matt. 28, in giving the Apostles their
commissions to go to teach all nations, baptizing them that believe;
and Paul also enumerates in Heb. 6 that baptism is a doctrine of
Christ. We are told that it was necessary for Paul to be baptized,
likewise the jailor, the people at Ephesus, the people at Samaria,
the eunuch, and even a man as just as was Cornelius could not escape,
and according to St. Luke, "some rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, not being baptized." According to the practice generally
in vogue, is it not about time for a revision of the Bible, that the
offending parts may be cast out? Ought you not to use your potent
influence to accomplish this end, as I contended in my former letter?
You charge me falsely with misquoting Mark 16: 16, because I placed
within the quotation an interpolation in brackets, and if this is
misquoting I surely had no intention of doing so. Any school boy would
have known that the words in brackets were mine. You say the passage
does not mean what my interpolation indicated, but you failed to point
out what it did mean. Look at it again, even if it is spurious and
of no consequence. The words "belief" and "baptism" are placed on
even terms by our Savior, and there is no other conclusion but that
the believer must be baptized (unless it is one of your figures of
speech). This being true, the unbeliever very naturally would not be
baptized and be damned, as Christ says, in consequence of unbelief and
nonconformity to this ordinance. Really, brother, over whose "shop"
should the sign "All kinds of turning and twisting done here" be
placed? I am perfectly willing to leave that to an intelligent public.
You entertained your congregation last Sunday evening by relating to
them a pretty fable about a jackass, who was in the woods braying. It
was nicely related and caused much laughter and mirth; and no one could
become offended by a jackass story; therefore, kindly allow me the same
privilege, Brother Brougher, as I also have a jackass story.

"Once upon a time" there was a jackass who imagined he {143} was
preaching the same Gospel that was taught many hundreds of years ago;
he stood before a large, fashionable congregation of people and started
to bray. He opened his mouth and said: "Oh, money, oh, money, thy
praises I'll sing; thou art my Savior, my God and my King; 'tis for
thee that I preach, 'tis for thee that I pray, and make a collection
twice each Sabbath day. Money's my creed, and I won't pray without it,
the heavens are closed against those who doubt it This is the essence
of popular religion, come regular to church and be plucked like a
pigeon. I'll have carriages, horses, servants and all, I'm not going
to foot it like Peter and Paul; neither, like John, feed on locusts
and honey, so out with your purse and down with your money. I gather
my knowledge from wisdom's great tree, and the whole of my trinity is
D. D. and C.; dimes, dollars and cents are all that I crave, from the
first step on earth to the brink of the grave. In the cold earth I may
soon be laid low, to sleep with the just, that have gone long ago; I
shall slumber in peace till the great resurrection, and be first on my
legs to make a collection." Then he blessed the contribution boxes and
the show closed.

Now, dear brother, don't you think that my jackass story equals yours,
and contains a better moral? I am sure it is just as funny; so now we
are even, on jackass stories, anyhow.

We see how careful the nations of the earth are in throwing their
protecting arms around the principle of authority; how careful they
are that all representatives acknowledged by them are endowed with
proper authority from their respective governments. In this nation of
ours no man has the right to initiate a foreigner into the government
unless he be endowed with authority, beyond the question of a doubt;
the government would undoubtedly punish any man who might read of a
commission given to others, and then take the authority unto himself to
initiate foreigners into the government of the United States.

We see the same careful protection thrown around the principle of
authority throughout the different states of the union; throughout
the different counties of the state, and throughout all the different
cities of the various counties. All will admit that without this
strict attention to authority, there would be no law, no order and no
protection. Out of all known governments the great government of God,
according to our opinion, is the only one that treats the principle of
authority in a careless and reckless manner. Anciently a prophet of
God, through the principle of revelation, called Aaron to the ministry;
at a later period, an Apostle of Jesus {144} Christ said that no man
was to take this honor unto himself save he be called of God, as was
Aaron. Yet men of our day will read where men were commissioned by
Jesus Christ eighteen hundred years ago, with authority to initiate
foreigners into the great government of God, and by virtue of that
authority, given to others, they take the honor unto themselves; while
declaring that the great God has sealed up the system of revelation;
and through the heavens, as you say, being as brass above our heads,
no man can be called, as was Aaron. In the face of all this, any man
purchasing a Bible, which contains that commission once given to
others, imagines he is called of God to preach the Gospel; and the
result is we are living in a babel of confusion; God says "He is not
the author of confusion."

Of course I realize these words of mine will have no weight upon you,
but they may be read by some fair-minded, thinking man, who may stop,
ponder and investigate.

By innuendo you advocated mob violence in your sermon last Sunday
night. Do you think it was becoming to a man who professes to be a
representative of the meek and lowly One whose mission was peace on
earth and good will to man? In carefully looking over the history
of this Mission for a number of years back and noting the number of
mobbings to which our Elders have been subjected, and the number is not
small, we find by careful comparison that 90 per cent of the mobbings
have been led in person or inspired by so-called Christian ministers.

Do you think you were serving God on the Sabbath when you so nearly
sanctioned brute force against a people who have never harmed you or
any of the good people of Chattanooga? Do you really believe that such
a course will make you popular with the liberty-loving and law-abiding
population of your new home? Think over the matter carefully and
perhaps you will admit you over-reached yourself a little.

You took for your text, "Answer a fool according to his folly." In
closing allow me to respectfully present you with the words of our
Master, "He who calleth his brother a fool is in danger of hell fire."

Respectfully,

Ben E. Rich.

{145}



MORMONS AND MORMONISM.

The Mormon People, Their Industry, Education and Morals--What is
Thought of These People by a Non-Mormon of Many Years' Residence Among
Them.

Lecture by Charles Ellis, a Non-Mormon.

No cause has so often led to strife as bigotry of religious devotees.
In no name has hate so largely gathered harvest of death as in that of
God. No prophet ever proclaimed a new word of the Infinite who was not
met with abuse. Many of the noblest men who have stood God-tongued on
earth have received not only vilification, but martyrdom. Not one of
them has escaped the cry of "infidel, atheist, impostor." Even Jesus
was crucified as a malefactor. His simple religion of love for God
and to man was lost in a cobra-filled jungle of theology. For more
than 1800 years Christianity has not been the religion of Christ. The
Christianity that boasts of having civilized the world is a mass of
dogmatic bran that makes poor bread of life--intellectually a bran-mash
for hidebound bigots who send all but a "predestined and foreordained"
baker's dozen to eternal torment because they will not take the
medicine. It has been itself partially civilized by the natural
development of the human mind, but is still much like that "white
sepulchre," fair to see, but full of lying dogmas, hypocrisy and sham.

Into this cloaca of pretence, the Mormons say God sent Joseph Smith
to destroy its rot with the quicklime of a new revelation from heaven
of priesthood, prophecy and providence. The Lord God Omnipotent, so
the story runs, came to this youth and informed him that the Gospel of
Jesus had been lost to the world through the wickedness of men; that
the religions of the present were a sham, that the churches were all
wrong, and that the true Gospel would be restored for the salvation of
mankind through him.

It is not surprising that Mormonism met with obloquy from its birth.
It would have been marvelous had not that obloquy become violence when
the "new dispensation" showed a {146} degree of success that roused the
fears of the evangelical churches, out of which converts to the new
sect were taken. The Mormon missionaries of those early years believed
the "fullness of time" had come, and that "the Lord" was speedily to
appear, sweep false Christianity from the earth and establish His own
kingdom. They believed it their duty to cry aloud, to warn the nations.
The boldness of the proclamation that all churches were without
recognition in the sight of God, and the only true Gospel was this "new
dispensation," was enough to arouse an opposition that has never wholly
ceased and is now raging more fiercely than ever. The rapid growth of
the new old faith embittered the sects and carried them to the shedding
of innocent blood, for many of the early Mormons suffered martyrdom for
their faith. Yet the blood of martyrs is still the seed of the church.

It is immaterial here whether Mormonism was born of God or of man. I am
not discussing its origin. No matter what its source, it was sure to
meet opposition. Had it come with such pomp that the world could have
beheld angelic heralds, it would have been denounced as vile. It has
been so with the founders of all religions. The prophets are always
stoned, The Buddha was accused of consorting with courtesans. Jesus'
enemies said harlots were His chosen companions. Mahomet was the called
slave of an ambitious mistress. Garrison and Phillips were denounced as
infidels and atheists. Joseph Smith was branded a fraud and lecher.

But as time rolls away from the days when an agitator lived, hatred of
him is forgotten and he is remembered in the results of his agitation.
The Buddha preceded Jesus many centuries and has a following today
of 400,000,000. Jesus is buried beneath a mountain of dogma, but
300,000,000 are seeking eternal life in His name. Mahomet came 700
years later and his people number 170,000,000. Only sixty-nine years
ago came Joseph Smith, and his following is already half a million.
Give Mormonism 1,200 years, as Mohammedanism has had, or 1,900 years,
as Christianity has had, and what was said of its founder will be
forgotten, but his following may then compare satisfactorily with what
the older faiths accomplished.

Had Joseph Smith never declared himself a polygamist he would have
been killed. The sects were too fanatical in the wild west to permit
so active a rival to exist. Had the Mormons remained east of the
Missouri, Brigham Young would have been killed and the church would
have been destroyed {147} by wholesale massacre. It was only their
isolation among the mountains that saved Mormonism and the Mormons
from annihilation. Even that would not have saved them had they not
increased so rapidly by conversions and immigration that before their
enemies realized their growth they had become too strong to be removed.
They have survived the hate that carried off their leader at Nauvoo.
They have proved themselves sublime stayers. They have nobly earned
the right to the home they have made in "the great American desert,"
and they are entitled to full liberty of conscience to practice their
religion, as well as to the same protection the nation gives to all
other churches.

If people must follow some leader in the name of God it makes little
difference what his name, when or whence he came, as far as the
national government is concerned. As long as his followers are honest,
industrious, virtuous and progressive they will advance from existing
to better conditions, whether they follow Moses, Jesus, Mahomet, Calvin
or Joseph, and our government, guaranteeing rights of conscience to
all, cannot dictate what their religion shall be. No matter what Joseph
Smith may have been, the people of the United States should not allow
themselves to be governed, by what was said against him, in their
judgment of the Mormon and Mormonism, as they are now.

By Their Fruits.

If history is reliable many of the popes were steeped in crime, yet
we do not condemn the Catholic church of today by that history.
Protestantism has done many cruel things in red-handed fanatical rage,
but we do not now hold it responsible for crimes of its past. The
daily press frequently tells of crimes committed by ministers of the
Gospel, but we do not condemn the class for the misdeeds of some of its
members. Neither should we condemn the Mormons and Mormonism of today
for what their enemies said of them forty, fifty or sixty years ago.
Put Joseph Smith down, then, as one of the men who have started new
systems of religion, and judge him now by the results of his system, as
we judge all others.

Many of the Jews are grand people, notwithstanding some of their
leaders ages ago were bad. There are many excellent men and women in
the churches, notwithstanding the fact that Christianity has drenched
the earth in blood. Mohammedanism has done a great work among its
people, {148} notwithstanding all Christendom looks upon its founder as
an impostor. Tried thus, what can be said of the Mormons and Mormonism?

Into the Desert.

It would be manifestly unfair to judge either Mormons or Mormonism by
that stormy career which preceded the hegira to Utah. Mormonism had
no opportunity to show its merits in a country where its enemies gave
it little time to act save in self-defense. It was aggressive in its
denunciation of existing churches as ungodly frauds and they attacked
it with violence, kept it acting on the defensive, forced it from place
to place, and finally drove it out of the United States. Having at
last found a spot a thousand miles from a "Christian" and subject only
to the possible encroachments of Indian tribes, less barbarous than
eastern Christians had been towards them, the Mormons and Mormonism
were, for the first time in their history, in a condition to show what
the people and their religion were.

When Brigham Young and his band of searchers for the new Holy Land
entered the valley of the Great Salt Lake there was no white man there
to give them a welcome, and therefore no alleged Christian present
to disturb their hope. They had traveled far and fared hard. As they
emerged from a rugged canyon the magnificent valley before them was
the most inviting spot they had seen, and the leader chose it at once
as their future home. Along the mountain streams, that ran gurgling
through the valley to lose themselves in the saltest sea upon the
earth, there was pasturage for the cattle, but for the men, exiles from
so-called Christian civilization, there was nothing save an opportunity
to gird their loins, forget their hunger and compel the stubborn glebe
to yield them food.

Like the Pilgrim Fathers.

When the Pilgrims landed in Plymouth Bay they met such a welcome of
dreary desolation as the Mormons received in the Salt Lake Valley.
As the Pilgrims crossed the Atlantic to find a land where they could
practice their religion, so had the Mormons crossed the plains of the
continent. But they must live. In all this wide mountain land no furrow
had been turned. It was mid-summer and the wanderers had little to
carry them through the approaching winter. They must close with the
opportunity and stake all on the hazard. They put in crops and the
seed baked in the hot earth or the frost {149} came before anything
could mature. They made huts to shelter themselves against the winter,
built a wall to guard against Indian attacks (or was it the Christians
they had fled from at Nauvoo) and pulled through until spring came,
and then they went out upon the foothills and dug the roots of the
sago lily for food. They planted and watered and saw their seed spring
and saw crickets come down upon the green spots, like Missouri and
Illinois Christians, and devour their hope. They fought crickets, made
irrigating ditches, cleared off sage, increased their fields, smothered
grasshoppers, praised the Lord and grew until, in five years, the
valley had become a hive of busy human bees, not a drone among them
all, and hundreds of baby bees crawling about the open doors of humble
homes in which patient, plodding, hopeful, prayerful women were the
grandest heroes of all. But the people crowded in so rapidly that for a
dozen years or more all were harassed by hard want. Luxuries there were
none. It was one long, ceaseless struggle to live. Women who came then
as little girls have pictured to me the cheerless years of their young
lives here when all were poor.

Their Staff and Comforts.

What sustained those people in that long ordeal? Faith, the strongest
power in all the world. Their religion was an enthusiasm. To them "God"
was a living presence. He had "called" them. He had led them forth
from persecution. He would remain their friend and they must succeed.
Without that faith they would never have come--having it they could not
fail. But to my mind a very important adjunct was the pluck that has
made the white race superior to obstacles and the master spirits of the
world. When we consider what the Mormons underwent to achieve success
here their constancy and heroism deserve sublimest commendation, and
they who will not concede this because the Mormons will not send them
to congress or subscribe their creeds are not true Americans--have
never known the meaning and the glory of our "religious freedom."

We honor the Pilgrims for their heroism in crossing the ocean and
founding a home in the forest of the new world. Why? Not because
of their religion. They were bigots and sometimes murderers. They
tortured, killed, or banished men and women who would not accept their
theology. We may despise their religion, but we must honor their
courage and be thankful for their success. Without them we never {150}
would have had our government, the light of the world and the hope
of mankind. But their base of supplies in Europe was nearer to them,
more accessible, than were the stores from which the early Mormons
could draw. The Pilgrims had means; the Mormons had none. When driven
from Nauvoo many of them were so destitute that agents were sent
through the east soliciting aid to save the people from starvation,
and one of these agents was Lorenzo Snow, now President of the Mormon
Church. Hundreds of the famished refugees died, in 1846, along the
malaria-poisoned bottoms of the Missouri river.

From robbery, murder and exile in Missouri and Illinois to success
and independence in Utah, the history of the Mormons is a record
of privation, hardship and endurance unequalled since the days of
the Moors in Spain, the Huguenots in France, and the Protestants in
Holland, when murder sought to exterminate all heresy in the name of
the Catholic church for the glory of God. It was the same spirit in
the Protestant heart that sought the destruction of Mormonism. But no
religion can be wholly bad or lacking in points of great merit that
could produce the magnificent results that have sprung from the Mormon
occupation of Utah.

In Thirty-Two Years.

Briefly, now, let us see what the Mormons did in Utah through the years
when they were nearly the entire population and while the industries
and the progress were almost wholly their own.

In 1880, thirty-two years after the arrival of the Mormons in Utah,
they had 9,452 farms, the average size being twenty-seven acres.
The population of the territory was then 143,963, of which 115,000
were Mormons, 99 per cent of whom were living in homes of their own.
To bring this land into productive farms there had to be done an
inconceivable amount of work that was not directly productive. The
land was covered with sagebrush and other wild shrubs and grasses that
made it as hard to clear as swamp land in the east. In addition to
clearing the land it had to be lined with ditches to carry water to
the growing crops. On those 9,452 farms there were several thousand
miles of ditching. All of this work was dead capital. It was the
"plant" of the farmers and was put in solely by the toil of a people
who never knew when it was "sundown." But it was done and the farms
were yielding great crops of small grain, corn, potatoes--all the {151}
vegetables of garden and field, and the fruits--apples, pears, plums,
apricots, peaches, grapes, berries--everything that the climate would
sustain. Live stock had risen from zero to millions in the shade of
the mountain. There were herds of sheep, cattle and horses, and the
great American lard producer was not wanting. Home manufactories were
prosperous at several points. Stores were in evidence everywhere.
"Zion's Co-operative Mercantile Institution" was the center of a
magnificent trade at Salt Lake, extending throughout the territory.
Temples had been built or were under construction at four points in
the territory. Meeting houses had been erected in every direction.
Academies were being started in Salt Lake, Logan and Provo. The people
were united and persistent in their determination to succeed, and
under the guiding will of Brigham Young this most remarkable effort
of colonization had been quietly carried forward in spite of the
continual harassment of the people by government officials, goaded by
the anti-Mormon ministers of the east. In thirty-two years the exiled
Mormons had become too strong to be despoiled again, and all that
time this alleged destroyer of the American home, polygamy, was being
practiced, and thousands of the most intelligent, honest, virtuous and
industrious men and women of the state today were the offspring of such
marriage relations. Why do not the Mormon haters of today attempt to
destroy the force of this fact? Because they know that they would fail.

Education.

A common charge against the Mormons for years, and revived now, was
that they were ignorant, illiterate and had no use for schools save to
teach their theological dogmas. But in 1870, only twenty-three years
after the first Mormon immigration, the percentage of school attendance
in Utah was higher than in Pennsylvania, New York and Massachusetts.
In 1881 the school population of Utah, from 6 to 18 years of age,
was 43,353 and the average daily attendance was 44 per cent. There
were then 395 schools in Utah. In 1888 the commissioner of schools,
a government official, reports 344 school districts and 460 public
schools in Utah. The school population was 54,943, of which 47,371 were
Mormons. The number of scholars enrolled was 32,988, of which 30,721
were Mormons. The value of district school property was $542,755, and
the amount paid for teachers in the public schools for the year ending
June 30, 1888, was $293,085. Yet the {152} anti-Mormon still screeches
his old cry that those were Mormon schools.

Let us see. The school commissioner referred to was not only a United
States official, but he was also a non-Mormon. Yet he reported that the
460 public schools of Utah were "non-sectarian." Then he enumerated
eighty-nine denominational schools, of which only four were Mormon. The
text books used in the schools, a list of which was given, set at rest
the charge that Mormons were opposed to education; and the average of
education of those who were trained in them is proof that they were not
theological schools. According to the United States census for 1880 the
percentage of persons in Utah of 10 years and upward who could not read
was five. In Rhode Island at the same time it was seven, and in the
United States at large thirteen. The average illiteracy in Mormon Utah,
thirty-two years after its settlement by people absolutely without
means and obliged to toil early and late to find a mere subsistence,
was less than in twenty states and territories in the union.

The growth of schools in Utah is full of evidence that the Mormons
were the friends of education. Remember that for years there was no
money in Utah, yet the people built houses in which they lived, as
well as hundreds of meeting houses. The first meeting houses were
"boweries"--posts set in the ground, a flat roof of poles shingled
with bushes cut in foliage. I have seen several of these old places of
worship. But as soon as practicable every ecclesiastical "ward" had its
"dobe" meeting house, which was also school house. But "Utah's best
crop" would soon overflow any ordinary Mormon meeting house and more
school room would become necessary. On Sunday the bishops of a ward
would say:

"My brothers and sisters, we need more school room in this ward. What
will you do to provide it?"

"I will give a team ten days."

"I will give a thousand 'dobes.'"

"I will give two weeks' work."

"I will give twenty bushels of wheat."

Thus it would go, and the school room would come as a labor of love
and without the passing of a dollar. Today there are no people in the
nation so eager to learn as are many of the young Mormons whom I have
met in my travels about Utah. The State University, the public schools,
all schools are full. The Mormon Church has its special schools, as
other sects have in Utah, and their theology has its place in the
studies, but the Mormons have no desire to introduce {153} Mormon
theology into the public schools and are opposed to the introduction of
any other theology, as of course they should be.

Morals.

In 1876 there were thirteen counties in Utah without saloon, brewery,
gambling house, brothel, lawyer, doctor, beggar, parson or politician,
and the population was exclusively Mormon.

In the winter of 1881-2 there were fifty-one prisoners in the Utah
penitentiary. Only five were Mormons, and yet the Mormon population
of the territory exceeded that of the anti-Mormon 500 per cent. From
1877 to 1882 the jail of Salt Lake county received only three Mormons.
In 1881 there were 1,020 arrests in Salt Lake City, of which 103 were
Mormon men and boys and six Mormon women; 657 non-Mormon men and 194
non-Mormon women. In 1882 the number of arrests in the same city was
1,561, of which 188 were Mormons and 1,373 non-Mormons. In that year
there were sixty-six barrooms in the city, and sixty of them were kept
by non-Mormons. There were fifteen billiard and bowling rooms and seven
gambling houses, all kept by non-Mormons.

The above, as well as the following statistics, are taken from "The
Palantic," published by A. M. Musser from the Utah penitentiary records
for the year ending June 30, 1884. Mr. Musser showed that, with the
population of Utah 83 per cent Mormon and the non-Mormon population
only 17 per cent, there were thirteen Mormon and seventy-eight
non-Mormon prisoners--a difference of 600 per cent in favor of the
Mormons. Add to this the difference in percentage of population, and
we have over 1,000 to one in favor of Mormon morality as compared with
that of the non-Mormon population of that period.

It should be understood that the above statement is not intended to
characterize the whole non-Mormon population. All through the Utah
years there have been non-Mormons here who were the most exemplary
people. They came in to stay, to engage in business, to make homes.
They have never engaged in the local disputes. They have never been
anti-Mormons. Because they would not join the raid against the people
they were for years sneered at as "jack-Mormons." The criminal element
referred to in these statistics as "non-Mormons," it is safe to say,
should have been put down as "anti-Mormons."

When the first edition of this pamphlet was issued the {154}
anti-Mormon paper of the city and several anti-Mormon parsons of Utah
and Canada undertook to answer these statistics by claiming that the
Mormons referred to were all "Latter-day Saints," while none of the
"non-Mormons" were "Christians." For answer I will say that the record
shows that of the seventy-eight "non-Mormons" in the Utah penitentiary
and referred to above, forty-five were members of Christian churches.
To show that this class of Utah non-Mormons were not worse than
Christians generally, I refer to statistics furnished the Deseret News
recently by Ephraim Ainsworth.

In 1889 Ohio had 942 convicts in penitentiary--826 of them belonged
to Christian churches. In 1893 Canada had 11,810 convicts--Catholics,
4,395; Church of England, 3,621; Methodists, 1,624; Presbyterians,
1,495; other sects, 698; Atheists, none. In 1896 the Kansas
penitentiary had 343 Methodists, 41 Presbyterians, 61 Campbellites,
other sects 12. In 1896 the Michigan state reformatory had as inmates
226 Methodists, 84 Baptists, 31 Episcopalians, 28 Congregationalists,
18 United Brethren, 229 Catholics, 65 Presbyterians. From the Tennessee
state prison, no date given, is reported 873 convicts--870 Christians
and three who would not state their religion. Thirty years ago a
Unitarian minister named Hatch made a careful investigation of criminal
statistics of the United States and Territories and published the
statement that 7 per cent of male convicts in the penitentiaries of the
country were ministers. Utah has had her full share of them in the last
thirty years, though she has kindly permitted them to run away, making
no attempt to capture them, save in the case of a parson who killed his
victim, cut her body up and attempted to burn it. A reward was offered
for him, but he is probably sending heretics to hell yet for Christ's
sake. It is said "there are none righteous, no, not one;" that is, we
all "live in glass houses" perhaps.

If the faces of children are an index to the morals and self-control of
parents, many Mormons have only to point to their offspring to prove
their own general purity. Indeed, it would be difficult to find finer
types of manhood and womanhood that are to be seen among the Mormons,
and this applies as well to polygamous as to monogamous offspring.

Right here, at the risk of being misunderstood, I want to say a word
about Mormon polygamy. It was not established for the gratification of
"lust," as has been so often averred, but was, I think, a conscientious
effort to improve humanity by stirpiculture. It was the only
considerable effort ever so {155} made among civilized people. I think
it would have been better to have given it a scientific instead of a
theological basis. In the country at large monogamous marriage has long
been degenerating. With its degradation society must sink to conditions
that must eventually, if not arrested, destroy our civilization.
Religion may insure humanity against fabled fire after death, but it
cannot breed out defects of will and taints of blood. Nobility of
person, life, character is born, not made by creeds. Humanity can
never be Godlike or fit for "the kingdom" until it is bred up from
its sometimes lower than "beastly" level. Mormon polygamy was the
beginning of such an effort. It has been killed by ignorant prejudice.
But soon or late the world will see the infinite need of wisdom and
science in the production and development of children, and then it
will be understood that the marriage system must be reconstructed.
Mormon polygamy was not the "beastly" thing a nation of adulterers
called it. It grew out of the belief that life is eternal, that there
can be no marrying in the future life; that women not married here can
never marry, but must be the servants of those who were married on
earth for all time here and hereafter. It grew out of the belief that
woman gains her "exaltation" in the kingdom with her husband, and he
in part through the excellence of his family. It was the Mormon women
who wanted polygamy. But no woman would enter that relation through
"lust." She could only enter it by conquering her passions, and in
doing that she prepared herself to become a divine mother. It is only
when women can learn to do this and compel men to respect their rights
in gestation, as all other female mammals do their mates, that mankind
can be saved from--itself. I am not advocating Mormon polygamy, but the
physical improvement of humanity as the natural and also the scientific
basis of mental and moral improvement. Sometime this great truth will
receive the recognition denied it now.

I come back now and say that, taking polygamy and all into careful
consideration, the morals of the Mormon people have always been as
good as the best in the nation, and through the thirty-two years when
the population of Utah was almost wholly Mormon and "this people" had
not come under the influence of those who wanted saloons, brothels and
dance halls opened to tempt young Mormons, their morals were infinitely
superior to anything to be found in the rag-tag-and-bobtail element
that for years existed on the {156} western frontier and found in Utah
the only oasis of the mountains.

Had the Mormons been Methodists the praises sung over their success
in Utah would have been heard around the world. But if they had been
Methodists they would not have been driven out of the United States.
Had they been bogus Christians they would have been too busy sending
other people to hell to have ever thought of colonizing on a barren
desert 1,000 miles from heretics. The sublime industry and heroic
achievements of the Mormons among the mountains of the west have
been studiously ignored and viciously misrepresented, not because of
any real or suspected immorality or menace to "the American home,"
but simply and solely because they were heretics to other sects.
Anti-Mormonism never did and does not now care for polygamy--it hates
the Mormon Church. A mean, whiskey-guzzling government official in
Utah once said to me: "Damn 'em, all 'e rights 'e Morm's hez is t'
pay taxes! 'Fthey don' like that I'm gitout!" That was for years the
anti-Mormon spirit in Salt Lake City. The struggle was to get control
and tax the Mormons out. That, too, was done largely. That is, many
of the poorer Mormons were forced to leave their homes in the city on
account of increased taxation levied by anti-Mormon officials. That old
spirit is now revived by this new crusade, not because of polygamy but
because the Mormons were compelled to take the power to levy taxes out
of the hands of their enemies.

A popular impression has been craftily created by the anti-Mormons of
Utah that its priesthood and polygamy are the cause of all hostility
to Mormonism. The shallowness of the pretense is easily seen when you
consider that the most vicious of anti-Mormons accept the Bible as
the infallible word and will of God. Yet the Bible teaches priesthood
and polygamy. Hence priesthood and polygamy cannot be the secret of
anti-Mormonism. The Protestants have been trying for a century to get
God into our national constitution and to make Jesus Christ the ruler
of the nation. Catholics and Protestants outnumber Mormons a thousand
to one. As long as they believe in theocracy they cannot quarrel with
the Mormons for holding the same belief. But if they were afraid the
Mormons might get into the kingdom ahead of them they would become
jealous, and jealousy is the womb of hate. The evangelical churches
fought Mormonism from its appearance, not because of polygamy and
priesthood, for there was neither {157} priesthood nor polygamy in
it then, but because it was a more enticing faith than their own.
Mormonism was running smoothly and growing rapidly without original
sin, total depravity and eternal torment as its steady theological
diet. Therefore, it was infidelity. Therefore, it must be destroyed.
Advocates of the undying worm, the lake of fire and the endless roast
drove the Mormons out of the United States. When they made the Utah
desert a prosperous land, adventurers crowded in to make speculation
and riot among them, but found them united against invaders. That
was put down against them. Yet a people driven into exile five times
would be idiotic not to unite for their own protection, and, as soon
as possible, prepare themselves to refuse to be driven again. When
their old enemies learned what advancement the Mormons had made
in Utah they came to send them to perdition again, but it was too
late. Then they raised the outcry against polygamy. That brought in
the aid of congress, the destruction of the incorporated church and
the confiscation of church property, but did not crush Mormonism. A
thousand polygamists went to the penitentiary, and still Mormonism
would not collapse. The Mormons did not hanker after salvation from a
hot spell in another life. They were too busy. They had hell enough
here. There was no brimstone in their conception of the hereafter.
A few might falter, but the mass stood by their faith, submitted
as best they could to the insolence of their enemies, waiting upon
the Lord to rescue them. Then came the scheme to disfranchise them.
Disfranchisement was the culmination of forty years of effort to
conquer the Mormons. If this calamity should fall the people would
be at the mercy of unscrupulous legislators who would practice the
sentiment of him who said all the rights the Mormons had were to
"pay taxes" or "git out." Before this danger the leader yielded and
declared that to save the people from ruin he would take no more plural
wives (he was then about 90) himself and would advise his people to
do likewise. That was in September, 1800. Two weeks later the church,
in conference, accepted the advice of its president that polygamous
marriages should cease.

Then it was seen that the Mormons would not abandon their homes--that
their persecutors should not grow rich upon property the fleeing Saints
must sacrifice. They had conquered by yielding, and there was no other
scheme to be sprung upon them. Those who hoped to crush Mormonism
were forced to accept the situation. The old political status {158}
disappeared and Mormons and Gentiles came together as democrats or
republicans, each party seeking to gain control of available public
offices. Men who had for years studied how they might throw increased
difficulties upon the Mormons were tumbling over each other in their
eagerness to reach the Mormon leaders, to profess their profound esteem
and to make known their willingness to aid the Latter Day Saints by
accepting office at their hands. The new love was touching, but it was
sincere? We shall see. The Mormons were rejoiced to find at last an
atmosphere of at least seeming peace about them, and gladly gave their
old enemies the offices they desired. The offices secured, the men who
were going to "boom Utah" proceeded to a recklessness of "improvement"
that increased public debt and taxes to an alarming degree. The Mormons
disliked to protest; they could not "grin," so they bore it with long,
sober faces. Then statehood was secured and the Mormons began to elect
their own more cautious men. The new lovers, chiefly office seekers,
scented defeat. The old snarl appeared. Startled politicians appealed
to willing ministers who needed funds sadly--and the old outcry against
the Mormons and polygamy was revived in 1898.

The New Crusade.

What basis is there for this renewed fight against the Mormons? When
Wilford Woodruff declared that he would advise the people to cease
plural marriages, and when his advice was accepted by vote of the
church, there were men living in Utah who were already in polygamy.
Most of them were old men, but there were young and middle-aged men
who had more than one wife. All through the government fight against
polygamy these men had lived with their wives as far as they could in
secrecy. Would they be likely to abandon their wives when peace had
been received?

To the Mormons, marriage is one of the most sacred of their ordinances.
It is solemnized by a priest in the name of God. It is "sealed" in
heaven also and is to continue forever. The true Mormon cannot ignore
the claims of his plural wife without being false to his vows and his
God. No manifesto of Wilford Woodruff, no vote of conference, could
annul a plural marriage or engage that any Mormon should cease to care
for his plural wives. This fact was as well known by every non-Mormon
in Utah in 1890 as it is today. It was understood by every gentile
politician, by every {159} representative of the government, by every
minister in Utah, that polygamists had been all along secretly living
with their polygamous wives. All knew that this would continue, yet
all agreed that no further notice should be taken of the matter and
polygamy should be left to die its natural death. That understanding
reached, no further effort was made to arrest "cohabs." Polygamists
lived openly with their wives and, as was expected, children were here
and there born--in one instance, at least, we have heard of "twins." So
matters stood from the close of 1890 for seven years. In 1897 we had a
semi-centennial celebration of the arrival of the pioneer Mormons. In
that "jubilee" Mormons and non-Mormons all joined heartily, including
the ministers who have since become rabid anti-Mormons; including also
the editor of the anti-Mormon paper who was so harmonious then that
he delivered an address when the Brigham Young statue was unveiled,
who was so inspired by the holy ghost or some other spirit (he is
more familiar with other spirits) as to declare in his paper that the
Mormons had founded the "new civilization." Yet at that very moment
he and all non-Mormons in Utah knew that those who were in polygamy
when "the manifesto" was issued, in 1890, had been living openly with
their wives for seven years and that children were being born in some
of the families. No objection was made, I repeat, until the Mormons,
to stay the increase of public debt, began to fill important public
offices with prudent men of their faith. There is no evidence that
the church had anything to do with this. It was the work of men who
owned property, and were anxious to protect it. That this is true is
seen in subsequent political action. A majority of the Mormons are
democrats. The democrats were rapidly getting control of the state.
In the municipal election of Salt Lake last November the republicans
elected their ticket over a known democratic majority of voters.
Why? Because the republicans ran their canvass on the line of the
anti-Mormon elections of a decade ago--the gentile democrat voted the
republican ticket. That is, while the Mormons have kept the compact
made when the people divided on national party lines, in 1891, the
others have largely broken it and we have now the democratic and
republican parties with the republican party working as an anti-Mormon
party largely. The excitement in Washington over the fact that the
republican Utah postmasters at Provo and Logan have been all along in
the same boat with democratic Roberts is amusing because of the frantic
efforts of men to show that they did not know that those men were
{160} old polygamists and had been living with their wives since the
"manifesto" of 1890. Of course they knew it. No man could have lived
in Utah since 1890 without knowing it. From 1890 until statehood came
United States district attorney and marshal for Utah knew it, and yet
so generally was it understood that the old condition was to be left
to die of old age that those officers made almost no effort to disturb
"cohabs." The postmasters in Provo and Logan were chosen because they
were influential republicans, and their wives did not count--then. The
anxiety over them now is that this excitement will defeat the hope of
the republicans to carry Utah in 1900, and when this whole matter is
analyzed it is found that the anti-Mormon agitators of Utah, with one
exception, are republicans, and the exception is a democrat who, having
most earnestly defended the Mormons ten years, was not recognized by
them when they were distributing political offices. The Catholics in
Utah are democrats and they have taken no part in this crusade. But
the evangelical ministers and sects are republicans. The ministers
have worked hard for 25 years to "save" the Mormons and yet have never
"saved" one who was in good standing in his own church. When polygamy
was given up, eastern interests in Utah missions fell, funds went low
and the wolf was howling in the back yard. The politicians who had
lived for years on salaries as government officers or later in state
or city offices were in the same "fix"--they had to raise hell or
starve--they did the first and, if I am not much mistaken, will do the
second also or--"git out."

Amnesty.

To make clear the subsequent action of the chief factor in the new
crusade it is necessary to call attention to what is known as "the
amnesty." By act of congress polygamous Mormons were disfranchised.
When peace was declared these men wanted their disability removed. A
well-meaning but not sagacious Mormon took it upon himself to secure
that result. He went for advice to the man who had tried for years
to obtain the disfranchisement of all Mormons. That person seems to
have expected such a visit. He advised a petition to the President
of the United States for amnesty. The unsuspecting Mormon swallowed
the hook and asked his adviser to write such a petition. It was,
perhaps, already written. The adviser, swearing he would never consent,
consented and the petition was produced. It was carried at once to
President Woodruff, lying sick at home. The sick man, unable to even
{161} read the petition, signed it. With his name attached it was taken
to the Apostles and all signed. The petition went to Washington, and,
after much unavoidable delay, was granted. But the course of the writer
of the petition, in the new crusade, his continual use of his petition
against the Mormons, might possibly be taken as evidence that he was
shrewdly forging a weapon that he might use against his quondam friends
if his love for them should grow cold, or if his ambition were not
satisfied. That is, it was well known here that when statehood should
come to Utah The-man-who-wrote-the-petition would be a candidate in
the first state legislature for the office of United States senator.
It was necessary, therefore, to have a republican legislature. To that
end the writer of the petition exerted himself to defeat the democratic
party in the election of 1895. The democrats were frothing over a
suspicion that prominent Mormon church officials were secretly aiding
the republicans. Democrats were crying bad faith on the part of the
church. The-man-who-wrote-the-petition defended the church officers
and charged the democrats with intent "to give Utah a black eye;" with
a desire "to keep immigrants from coming here;" with "the awakening
of unworthy suspicions against us all;" with trying "to alarm the
country;" with committing "an outrage." A few days before election,
in 1895, The-man-who-wrote-the-petition, the man who, for more than a
year, has found nothing too scurrilous to publish against the Mormons,
the man who expected to be elected to the senate in January, 1896, said:

"There is not a man, woman or child in Utah who for one moment thinks
there is any agreement or thought of restoring polygamy, or that it
could be possible even if such a thought was in the mind of a few
bigots."--Salt Lake Tribune, October 19, 1895.

"There is going to be no revival of polygamy; there is going to be no
return to church rule." (The same, Oct. 22, 1895.)

The legislature was republican, but The-man-who-wrote-the-petition
was "not in it." In the race for senatorship he was shut out in first
heat. That straw of ingratitude broke the candidate's editorial back
and he seems to have waited for an opportunity to use his petition.
The Deseret News says he was paid for it at the time it was written,
or, perhaps, concocted, but the action of the legislature was a deadly
frost and the bloom of his young love for the Mormon church was killed.

{162}

The Secret Opened.

In 1897, the Mormons, aided and abetted by many of the most influential
non-Mormons, made a non-partisan effort to secure much needed municipal
reforms. The movement was largely successful, but was hotly denounced
by the office seekers of the republican and democratic parties as a
"trick" of the church to restore political control over its people.
In Salt Lake City the feeling was bitter and an attempt was made to
resurrect the anti-Mormon "liberal" party. Failing in that, the excited
politicians appealed to the clergy. A Presbyterian paper in Salt Lake
began the publication of sundry articles running back into early Mormon
literature, culling the crudities, slips and discrepancies to be found
therein and using them to condemn the Mormons and Mormonism of today--a
course that would be paralleled by attacking the Presbyterians of the
present with the fanaticism, folly and worse of "no papacy" days.
This publication was scattered over the country and started up the
smouldering non-Mormon fire. The smoke encouraged the clergy in Utah
to believe that there actually might be something in their sensational
talk about polygamy. Then they got together in the summer of 1898 and
adopted a series of resolutions declaring that plural marriages are
still being contracted, that the Mormons control the state, injure the
public schools, and that old Mormon Utah is on deck again. A few weeks
later came the state democratic convention to nominate candidates and
B. H. Roberts was nominated for congress. He was one of the men who
were in polygamy when plural marriage was stopped. From the day of
Roberts' nomination the writer of that petition found his opportunity
and from then until now has not ceased to vilify the Mormons. He
insisted that the election of Roberts would create a storm and then
created it himself--a very common trick of false prophets. He revelled
in his petition. That is, he sprung the trap he himself had set. I
think he was trying to force the Mormon church to declare for the
election of the republican ticket, for there was to be another election
of a senator in 1899.

In addition to his use of the petition he reprinted the testimony of
President Woodruff before a Master of Chancery and tried to prove
that the manifesto of 1890 prohibited cohabitation among those then
in polygamy. He knew that the president of the church could not annul
a marriage. He knew that the hearing was held preliminary to a decree
restoring what {163} remained of the escheated church property. He
knew that property was worth millions of dollars and the church needed
it. There was not an attorney engaged in that hearing who did not want
the church to get back its property. There was not a non-Mormon in
Utah then mean enough to wish that the church might not get it. But
there must be a record to the effect that polygamy had been given up.
So President Woodruff consented to say that he included "cohabs" in
his manifesto. At that time the editor of the Salt Lake Tribune was
friendly, as I have shown, and although it now seeks to brand President
Woodruff as a liar it said then that the manifesto "went only to the
point of plural marriages," and added "we believe that the rule laid
down has been as sacredly kept by this people as it would have been
done by any other people; that the Mormons and Gentiles have a right
to say that the change amounts to a transfiguration." The measureless
infamy of the disappointed office seeker now seeking to pile odium upon
the honored dead will be a fitting monument to his malodorous memory
in Utah for years to come; and if our good old friend did stretch the
truth to save that property it was a lie like that of Hugo's nun, the
recording angel dropped a tear upon the slate and rubbed it out.

All this insanity of excitement through the country over alleged
polygamous marriages has been created by a few men who are now laughing
over their success in fooling the people. They have hunted these
mountain states over--have imported special aid from New York--have
declared that plural marriages are being contracted, and yet have
not been able to find one case. Defeated in that they have arrested
several men for "unlawful cohabitation" and advertised that as proof of
polygamous marriages.

Avowing, with maledictions upon it, that polygamy is the "twin-relic
of barbarism" and must die, they yet will not let it die, but drag it
from its senile sleep, enhorse and caparison it like a waxen image of
some old Catholic saint and lead it in triumphal procession through the
land to excite the clamor of women gone hysterical through brooding
in nightly loneliness over the clandestine amours of their monogamous
husbands with other women more charming than themselves!

If polygamy were permitted to die a natural death the evangelical
churches would lose their last foothold against the rising tide of
Mormonism. It is not polygamy that disturbs them, but the steady growth
of the Mormon church. Right or wrong, there is a current running to the
Mormon church with {164} increasing volume and velocity. The Mormon
church and faith have been a boon to hundreds of thousands as poor
as were those who heard Jesus gladly. It is today nearer to being a
successful effort to inaugurate the Brotherhood of Man than anything
ever tried.

In Conclusion,

I want to say that what is here presented does not err from truth
and was not written with either knowledge or consent of any member
of the Mormon church. It stands upon my personal knowledge. I am
not a member of any church, and view all sects philosophically. I
cannot perceive that any religion has been of divine origin, in
the theological sense of the terms. To my mind they are all human,
very human, in their origin. But, conceding to all the rights of
intellectual liberty I claim for myself, I question not the right of
the people to any religion that satisfies them. In so far as creeds
and dogmas impose upon credulity, I claim the right to protest. Thus I
have long protested against Calvanism in all its varieties as a wholly
unjustifiable cruelty forced upon humanity through its ignorance and
fear. I gladly admit that theology, like everything else, is subject
to the progressive influence of the ages, and realize that the God of
Calvin is not as mean as he was 400 years ago--has been much improved
in the last 100 years under our free government and public education. I
cheerfully concede that all theologians mean to be honest in the dogmas
they create, and I believe that all churches sincerely endeavor to hold
their people to defined standards of moral life. But I lay this against
them--that they would have men and women practice moral living, not for
itself, but to secure a definite reward after we have ceased to live
here, a reward called "salvation" from threatened ills and horrors that
exist only in the excited imagination of ignorance and superstition. It
is childish--it is the mother bribing her boy with bread and jam, or
frightening him with threats of "the bad man."

You see, then, that I am one of that class of persons called by all
the professors of all the thousand and one varieties of so-called
Christianity "an infidel." It is the easiest thing in the world to
call people by opprobrious names, as the history of these unpopular
Mormons makes manifest. In fact, no new thought appears that is not
infidelity to some older one--no new issue that is not maligned by the
satisfied believer in some old one. The term "infidel," as applied
to persons who think for themselves, do their own business with the
Infinite, and {165} decline proffered rewards based on fear of God, is
one of merit rather than reproach. Jesus was the great infidel of his
time--crucified for truth derided by the prevailing orthodoxy of his
day.

There are two kinds of infidelity in the world. One comes by growing
up out of existing beliefs, the other by falling below them. The only
harmful infidelity exists in the churches, and consists of professing
one code of morals and living another. For instance, all Christians
call Sunday the Lord's day and pretend to keep it holy, a sacred day
devoted to the worship of God. Yet half of them, in this country, keep
it as a day of frolic and dissipation. That does not harm the day, does
not injure God, but it makes hypocrites of professing Christians. They
are infidels who have fallen below their religion. For instance, again,
take the seven million names of American people who petitioned congress
to expel the Utah congressman. It is safe to say a large percentage of
the signers were children who did not know what they were doing, but
whose names were taken by Christian adults with intent to deceive.

A long study of religions convinces me that all mean to do good, yet
fail, in great part, because they work for a wrong purpose. That is,
they work, not for this life, but for one to be sometime somewhere
"above the stars," in a locality that has never been more than a myth;
and the object of working for that unreality is to escape another
mythical locality below the earth, in the earth, or somewhere else
equally uncertain. This would do in a world peopled with ignorant
savages, but will not do for intelligent men and women. This fact is
recognized by the churches. They spend their money chiefly to carry
their religion to the "heathen," realizing that it is useless at
home. The religions of the world need reconstructing. They have much
to learn and unlearn. I know of no church working so zealously for
what it believes to be the good of humanity as Mormonism. I know its
leaders, its system, its work. Its directors, as a whole, are sincere,
conscientious, clean, honest men. If they err, it is not from evil
intent. To them the presence of God is a living faith. It may be an
error, but the faith is there, and the work is the result.

Mormonism is peculiar in this: it does not regard this life as a
preparation for an eternity of idle psalm-singing in a future existence
Lord-knows-where, but a school of moral training for an eternal life
right here after "the resurrection." To this end it aims to make its
people intelligent, capable, honest, moral, successful now, as the
proper means of reaching the greatest {166} happiness then. This may
be a practical basis for a possible end. Its enemies say it is based
on fraud. Well, it is said they cannot demonstrate that Christianity
was not based on fraud--cannot demonstrate that Jesus ever existed. But
Christianity is here, and, whether He lived or not, it will remain.
If it should transpire that Joseph Smith was not the founder of
Mormonism, that the engraved "plates" had no existence, Mormonism is
here, the faith is here, and it too will remain. We can only dismiss
all questions of "fraud" and choose--the best. The best is that which
is most beneficent in practical helpfulness. Tried thus, Mormonism
possesses merit that cannot be ignored by any who would concede equal
rights--fair field and no favors--to all. I see in it what to me
are weaknesses, but in what system do they not exist? They are the
weaknesses of its youth and are being outgrown--would be outgrown
faster but for the malevolent opposition that drives it back upon
itself. But let no enemy of Mormonism flatter himself that it can be
killed by vituperation. It is the most remarkable movement in the
religious world since the days of Mahomet--the most wonderful religious
movement in forty generations. The thunder and lightning of its
enemies cannot strike it down. It must fall, if fall it must, as other
religions have fallen--by its own decay after it has lived its natural
life. Keeping Roberts out of congress will not arrest its course, and
it is highly probable that the time will come when the American people
who want no church interference with our national government may be
glad to have the aid of the now maligned Mormons.

Consider that there are today 1,700 young Mormons tramping over this
continent in city, town and hamlet--young men who are so circumspect
in all their deportment that not even the most bitter enemies of their
faith have the hardihood to raise their voices against them--young men
who are steadily making the fundamental principles of their faith known
to the people. There has been nothing like it in the world for hundreds
of years, nothing in so-called Christian countries since the steady
persistence of the Protestants on the continent and in Great Britain,
and it is going to produce great results. The Mormons might be called
the non-Conformists of this country and in spite of all efforts to the
contrary they are going to wield an influence upon its future. One of
the Utah men in Washington fighting the Mormons was honest enough to
tell the truth when he said in a public meeting: "It is not polygamy
but Mormonism we want to check." But it won't check or {167} warp and
is growing, and I write with a growing interest in its success. In
1718 there came 900 non-Conformists from Ulster county, Ireland, to
Boston. They were Scotch-Irish Protestants seeking religious freedom.
They introduced the Irish potato in New England. Some of them gave to
older Yankees a few potatoes with instructions for planting them. They
grew, blossomed, and bore fruit, but the Yankees cooked the seed balls
and said they found them anything but good. Next spring when spading
up their gardens they found the potato crop. Mormonism presented to
Christian sects a new theological potato, so to speak. They tried it,
ate the wrong end of the growth and denounced it. But there will come
a new spring in which old sectarian gardens will be plowed up and then
the real fruits of Mormonism will be discovered--and will be found to
be both palatable and healthful.

    "_Where there is no change of priesthood, there is no change of
    ordinances, says Paul. If God has not changed the ordinances and
    the priesthood, howl ye sectarians! If He has, when and where
    has He revealed it? Have ye turned revelators? Then why deny
    revelation_?"

    --_Joseph Smith, The Prophet_.

    "_All who live according to the best principles in their
    possession, or that they can understand, will receive peace, glory,
    comfort, joy, and a crown that will be far beyond what they are
    anticipating. They will not be lost_."

    --_Brigham Young_.

{168}



Prophets and Apostles Necessary.

By the Late President, George Q. Cannon, in Millennial Star, 1866.

The assertions made by the Latter-day Saints that God has raised up a
Prophet and Apostles in these days, who have the authority to teach
and instruct men in the principles of His kingdom, and that their
teachings and counsels are entitled to consideration and obedience,
are statements that are looked upon by many to be little less than
blasphemous. Many cannot conceive how individuals, who are apparently
so sane and possessed of good judgment on other subjects, should be so
visionary, and so wholly absorbed in the strange belief of there being
men who hold this power on the earth in these days. They, nevertheless,
believe that men clothed with this power have existed upon the earth
at various times, who were inspired to speak and write; and they are
quite willing to receive the writings, said to be theirs, upon very
slight testimony, and rest all their hopes of future and eternal
blessedness upon their veracity. They have an idea that it is perfectly
reasonable to believe in the words of the Apostles and Prophets who
lived thousands of years ago, and they think that, were they alive now,
they could place all reliance and confidence in their words as the
word of God. Peter, James and John, with their brethren, are looked up
to as having been something superior to mortal, and many, forgetting
that they were but human, think that it would only be necessary, did
they live now, for them to declare this message and state that they
were empowered to teach it, and men without the slightest demur would
instantly embrace its doctrines. This professed admiration of dead
Prophets and Seers, however, is not confined to this generation alone;
it was a characteristic of other generations. The Jews, when Jesus was
in their midst, would build and adorn the tombs of the Prophets {169}
whom their fathers had slain, and say that if they had lived in the
days of their fathers they would not have persecuted or killed them,
while at the same time they were thirsting for the blood of the Son
of God, and they did not rest until He had shared the same fate with
the Prophets whom they so ostentatiously honored. But what is there
visible at the present time from which we can infer that were any of
the ancient Prophets or Apostles in the midst of this generation, they
would be any better treated, or their teachings given more heed to,
than they were in the generation in which they lived? The present ideas
of professing Christians--that the canon of Scripture is full--and that
there is no further need of direct revelation--would not admit of their
recognizing a Prophet or an Apostle, should they be so fortunate as to
have one sent into their midst. They are, in this respect, in a similar
situation to the Jews at the time of the advent of the Messiah. They
were in possession of the writings of the Prophets, and held them as
the present sects of Christendom hold the Bible. Their writings were
their oracles, and they indulged in the idea, as the modern sects do
about the Bible, that they contained all that was necessary to lead
them to salvation, until Shiloh should come, without the aid of any
Prophets or Apostles to act as living oracles in their midst. They
doubtless imagined that they were warranted in this belief by their
sacred Scriptures, in the same manner that many at the present day
imagine that the present Scriptures, composed of the writings of the
ancient Prophets and Apostles, warrant them in rejecting all further
revelation. This misapprehension of the Jews was followed by terrible
results; they ceased to have a national existence, and they were
scattered and dispersed abroad.

If the Scriptures the Jews had and the Scriptures we at present have
are examined, it will be found that there is a greater amount of
evidence in our possession in favor of the idea of living oracles, or
Prophets and Apostles, being raised up and inspired in these days,
than there was among the Jews in the days of the Apostles to support
them in believing that they would make their appearance at that time.
In fact the Scriptures cannot be fulfilled until these things take
place. Prophecy upon prophecy has been uttered and recorded, pointing
clearly and definitely to the _last days_--to the time when God should
again set His hand the second time to recover the remnants of His
people; when He would send for many fishers and they would fish them,
and for {170} many hunters and they would hunt them; when His Kingdom
would again be built up, and their judges be restored as at the first,
and their counsellors as at the beginning; when many nations would
be seized with the desire to go up to the mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob, that they might be taught in His ways
and be able to walk in His paths. To fulfill these prophecies--which
were, no doubt, given with the expectation of their being as literally
accomplished as the prophecies in relation to the Messiah which the
Jews misapprehended--men holding power and authority equal with the
men of old who were called to perform similar works, have to be raised
up; and if they are raised up and inspired, they must have equal power
to teach, counsel and direct the children of men, and their teachings,
counselings, and directions will be as obligatory upon mankind as
the teachings, counselings and directions of the ancients. Since the
creation of man and the first revelation of God's will unto him, we
have no account of the Lord ever having a people upon the earth, or
a system which He recognized as being His, without also having men
of this description--men with whom He could communicate, and through
whom His mind and will could be made known to the people. They were
the living oracles, possessing living Priesthood, through which they
could obtain light and intelligence from the Almighty, to expound with
authority to the children of men; and their words, whether delivered
orally or written, were equally binding upon the people with the words
of any preceding servant of God. That this was the case all sacred
history bears abundant evidence.

The necessity of inspired men, in order that the prophecies may be
fulfilled, must be apparent. Man has always been the instrument which
the Lord has used to accomplish His purposes. But apart from the
prophecies which set forth in unmistakable language, that the days
of revelation and intercourse between the Deity and man will again
be restored, there is an abundance of evidence to prove that there
cannot be a Church of Christ on the earth without having Prophets
and Apostles as its officers. They were not to be confined to the
early days of Christianity alone, but were to be continued "until
all should come to the unity of the faith, unto the knowledge of the
Son of God;" they were to be as necessary "for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edifying of the body
of Christ," as evangelists, pastors and teachers are. To assert that
{171} Prophets and Apostles are no longer needed would be to assert
that evangelists, pastors and teachers are likewise unnecessary. The
great head of the Church, in its organization, had a definite object
in placing these officers in His Church and that object could not be
accomplished except by their perpetuity. When these officers ceased
to be recognized then the Church ceased to be the Church of Christ.
It would be considered a very great departure from the spirit of the
Gospel to assert that pastors and other ministers--such for instance as
teachers and evangelists--were no longer needed; and yet the evidence
necessary to support their recognition as officers of the Church proves
that not only they are necessary, but that Prophets and Apostles also
are required. The proofs brought forward to substantiate the idea that
Prophets and Apostles are no longer needed will apply with much force
to the other officers in the Church; and if the necessity for one or
two of the callings in the Church has ceased to be, it can easily
be proved that there is no further necessity for the remainder. The
belief that these callings are no longer needed has been inculcated
in Christendom by both precept and example. A false Christianity has
flourished for centuries, and men have been taught to rely upon it
as the religion of Jesus, and not seeing these callings filled in
it, it has required but little persuasion to cause them to fall into
the erroneous belief that they were only designed for the days when
Christianity was first preached. If one, more inquiring and penetrating
than his fellows, should ascertain by a perusal of the Scriptures, that
there was nothing to discountenance the idea of the perpetuity of such
callings, and should make inquiries to know why they did not at present
exist, his doubts would be removed by pointing him to Christianity as
it exists around him, flourishing and yet destitute of these offices;
and its existence without them must be received as evidence that the
Lord had altered the organization of His Church and deemed these
offices unnecessary. Men instead of making their belief conform to the
Bible have endeavored to distort it and make it correspond with their
ideas and systems; when the plainly written word would not admit of
that they have endeavored to hide their errors and the incorrectness
of their position, by stating that the Scriptures have a spiritual
meaning--and they do not literally mean what their language denotes,
but they require to be spiritualized to be understood. Miserable
subterfuge! What a cunning device of the adversary of souls and his
agents, to {172} entrap and deceive mankind! Impress upon the people
that these are no longer necessary, and they will cease to look for
them; persuade them to believe that the word of God has a different
meaning from the one apparent on its face, and they will see nothing
condemnatory of sin and the commission of gross wrong; Satan's victory
and triumph will then be easy.

The correctness of the position we have assumed in stating that
Prophets and Apostles are as necessary in the Church of Christ now
as they ever were, is not at all affected by the truth or falsity
of the doctrines we believe in and teach. Because the Latter-day
Saints believe in these things does not detract one iota from their
truth. These officers would be indispensably necessary, wherever a
Church of Christ existed, if we as a people, were extinct. If men
believe the Bible they must believe as Latter-day Saints, and if
there is a Church of Christ upon the earth there must of necessity
be Prophets and Apostles, and if there are Prophets and Apostles,
they have the right to teach and instruct mankind in the principles
of the Lord's Kingdom, and their teachings and counsels are entitled
to consideration and obedience. A great many find considerable fault
with the Latter-day Saints because they rely so much upon the words of
their Prophets and Apostles. They think it decidedly anti-republican;
and some, to give vent to superabundance of their spleen, occasionally
call Brigham Young and his brethren hard names, because they, being
men, make themselves equal with the Apostles. These individuals,
with their present feelings, had they lived in any other generation
when Prophets and Apostles were upon the earth, would have taken a
precisely similar course to oppose them. It is not the individuals
they are warring against--though many of them, no doubt, think that
it is--but it is the principle. How much more republican would we be,
if we paid no attention to their teachings, than we are at present?
Can not we exercise our rights and privileges as republicans, to as
full an extent by doing right as by doing wrong--by being obedient
to the will of the Almighty as by being disobedient? The Latter-day
Saints cannot fail to hearken to and have confidence in the words of
their leaders, so long as they believe as they do about the necessity
of Prophets and Apostles, and the authority they hold; and while they
retain this belief, the only thing that will destroy this confidence
is to prove that they do not hold this authority, and are not Apostles
and Prophets. So long {173} as we know that men have this authority
it makes but little difference to us what their names may be. And the
moment the Latter-day Saints became convinced that Joseph and Brigham
Young were Apostles of Jesus Christ, they were as willing to believe
their testimony and to hearken to their counsel and teachings, as they
would have been to have believed and hearkened to those of the ancient
Apostles.

    "_If we could see our heavenly Father, we should see a being
    similar to our earthly parent, with this difference: our Father
    in heaven is exalted and glorified. He has received His thrones,
    His principalities and powers, and He sits as a governor, as a
    monarch, and overrules kingdoms, thrones and dominions that have
    been bequeathed to Him, and such as we anticipate receiving. While
    He was in the flesh, as we are, He was as we are_."

    --_Brigham Young_.

    "_Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although
    we may not see the reason thereof until long after the events
    transpire_."

    --_Joseph Smith, August 25, 1842_.

{174}



COMPREHENSIVE SALVATION, OR THE GOSPEL TO THE LIVING AND THE DEAD.

By John Nicholson.

An Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.

First Principles--Authority--Miraculous
Gifts--Organization--Apostasy--Restoration--The Gospel Preached to the
Spirits of the Departed--Different Degrees of Glory--Turning the Hearts
of the Fathers to the Children, and the Children to their Fathers.

Honest professing Christians, of every creed, must freely admit that
the position of the Latter-day Saints in regard to what are called
the first principles of the doctrine of Christ is invulnerable. They
must acknowledge that faith in God, the Eternal Father, in His Son
Jesus Christ and the divinity of His mission, and in the Holy Ghost,
is unquestionably Scriptural. They must accede also that repentance of
sins, as preparatory to their remission, occupies the same Biblical
position. Neither can they consistently question the object of baptism,
being for the remission of sins--"Repent and be baptized every one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins." Nor can
the mode (immersion) be questioned by them. Paul, in his epistle to the
Romans, likens baptism, administered in the proper form, to the burial
and resurrection of Christ; a very beautiful figure--immersion in the
liquid element. No other method bears the remotest resemblance to being
buried and resurrected. Nor do {175} unprejudiced investigators for
religious truth deny that the baptism of true Christianity, as taught
and administered by John the Baptist, Christ and His disciples, was
intended, not for infants, but only for those persons who had reached
the years of accountability. This must be obvious, because before
people were baptized for the remission of sins it was necessary, as a
preparation, that they should believe and repent, a process impossible
to little children. The latter being, according to the Savior, of the
Kingdom of Heaven, have no sins to remit, for no unclean thing can
enter the heavenly kingdom. Sinfulness is uncleanness.

It is easy for the Saints to show that the ordinance administered in
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, of the "Laying on of
hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost," is strictly a Bible practice.
Read, for instance, the 8th chapter of the Acts, and numerous other
passages, "Then laid they their hands upon them and they received the
Holy Ghost." [1]

The necessity of authority to enable man to represent Jesus on the
earth in the ministry of the Gospel, is also admitted freely by the
unprejudiced. The absence of such authority among the lifeless sects
is conspicuous. Paul lays down an unqualified rule upon this point:
"No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron." Aaron was called of God by revelation from Him, through
the Prophet Moses. The sects of to-day repudiate revelation and its
necessity, and how therefore can they be in possession of an authority
that can only be given by that means? It is impossible. [2]

Honest-hearted people who profess a belief in the Bible cannot and do
not deny that a true Church of Christ must necessarily enjoy the fruits
of the Spirit. These are the gifts enumerated by Paul in the 12th
chapter of Corinthians. How can a belief in such things be repudiated
when they existed in the primitive Church, which was the genuine Church
of Christ, established by Himself? If the true Church is extant now,
its peculiarities and blessings must be the same. [3]

It surely will be admitted that the Church will not only be the same
in doctrine, ordinances, spirit, gifts and authority, {176} but also
in organization and officers. Hence, as in primitive times, it will
incorporate apostles, prophets, and other inspired men, who were given
to the Church to edify its members until they "all come to a unity of
the faith." It may be well to ask how a Church could be the Church of
Christ denuded of some of its most conspicuous doctrines, ordinances,
spirit, gifts, officers and organization. [4]

In fact so wide is the gulf that separates the true Church--that
described in the Scriptures--from the repudiative, revelationless,
spiritless, disjointed churches of the day that it is difficult to
discover even a remote resemblance. But these things are very plain and
clear. They must be obvious to fair, candid truth-lovers. And as that
is the only class whom the glorious light of revealed Gospel truth will
be likely to impress with its beauty, it is to such that we, in the
present writing, appeal.

How clear is the wide discrepancy between the primitive Church, the
true Church, and the sects of "Christendom" in every feature. How
often we have listened to exclamations of astonishment from the lips
of persons when this remarkable difference was first explained to them
by the elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They
have wondered that so potent a fact did not strike them before. This
amazement has been increased when their attention has been called to
the predictions of the inspired apostles and prophets regarding the
apostasy from the ancient faith of the Saints. In fact Paul positively
declares, in the 2nd chapter of 2nd Thessalonians that "That day
(meaning the second coming of Christ) shall not come except there come
a _falling away_ first." But it is not our purpose to elaborate upon
this subject, preferring that our readers should peruse the Scriptures
relating to it, guided by the passages to which their attention is
directed by note. [5]

The seeker after religious truth turns to the glorious promise of a
restoration of the ancient order of the Church of Christ, as to a ray
of sunshine penetrating the surrounding gloom. Jesus Christ, teaching
his disciples upon the signs of his coming, predicted, as among the
indications of the approach of the great event, the preaching of "This
Gospel of the Kingdom" for a witness. John the Revelator, while gazing
down the flowing stream of time, saw not only the restoration of the
Gospel, but the manner of its being committed to man, {177} (by a holy
angel). The angel who showed him these things was not an imaginative
being, depicted according to the fancy of an artist. He was one of the
prophets who had kept the faith and gone into the presence of God, at
whose command he visited the Revelator. But let the reader search the
Scriptures upon these points, for we speak according to the "law and
the testimony." The foregoing truths have been frequently and ably set
forth in various writings of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints and are constantly laid before the public in plainness by the
elders in their preaching of the word of God. This being the case it
is not our present purpose to enter upon an elaboration of them. Our
position, thus far, being established upon a sound scriptural basis, we
will undertake to answer some objections which leap into the minds of
some inquirers in opposition to the claims of the Latter-day Saints to
being in possession of the pure Gospel restored.

From what we have already shown it cannot be truthfully denied that the
Scriptures faithfully describe the doctrines, principles, ordinances,
powers, gifts, organization and authority enjoyed by the Church
established by Christ and his ancient apostles.

All Bible believers must admit that that Church was a true one, having
been set up under the personal supervision and by direction of the
Divine Master himself.

The fact also stares all people broadly in the face that between that
true and ancient Church and the sects of so-called Christendom, now
existing, there is an irreconcilable difference in almost every respect.

The only logical conclusion that can be reached in reasoning upon
such a condition is, that the primitive Church being the true one,
having divine sanction and approval, all churches differing from
it must necessarily be spurious. However unpalatable so evident a
situation may be to professing Christians, it should be accepted by
them with becoming grace and composure that they may be prepared for
the revelation to come. God is consistent and truthful in all his
ways, and what he says he will do, whether by his own voice or by the
utterances of his inspired servants, he will fulfil. Our readers,
if they be consistent Bible believers, are constrained to accept of
the fact presented in the sacred record, that the Lord did purpose,
subsequent to a great apostasy, to reveal from heaven the true order of
the Gospel. This belief being established in their minds, probably the
chief difference in their position and ours is that while they merely
admit the {178} existence of such a precious prophetic promise we
advance a step further, taking the ground that it has been fulfilled.
The message we declare is that God raised up the Prophet Joseph Smith,
to whom and to others he sent angels who conferred upon them the
authority of the Holy Priesthood, enabling them to legally officiate in
the ordinances of the Gospel. We announce that God has set up, in this
age, by revelation, the true Church of Christ, to prepare the way for
his second coming, which is near at hand. [6]

A prominent objection urged against the Latter-day Saints is that they
are exclusive in their views. They are charged with being contracted in
their opinions. This arises from their claim to being the only people
having the true plan of salvation. If our readers will calmly weigh
the matter, they will be free to admit that as in all other respects
they resemble the ancient Church of Christ, so they do in this. The
disciples of the Lord held that they were right and, as a logical
sequence, all others were wrong, because all systems differing from
one that is correct must necessarily be spurious. The ancient Saints
were correct in this position, for as they presented the light to the
world, the existing sects had no longer an excuse for remaining in
darkness. If the Latter-day Saints are in possession of the same saving
principles, their position in regard to the sects of this day is the
same.

The Redeemer himself was exceedingly exclusive, as witness the decisive
quality of his language to Nicodemus, "Except a man be born of water
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." This was
a definite rule, laid down by the highest authority, to which not the
slightest intimation of an exception was made. All must receive the
genuine baptism of water and of the Spirit, the former administered
by immersion, and the latter by the laying on of hands, or remain
forever outside the pale of God's heavenly Kingdom. This is unqualified
exclusiveness, based upon the laws which have been revealed from
heaven, and which are eternal in their nature and effects.

But the objector, unwilling to release an apparently feasible opposing
point, may say he can see where this exclusiveness might be justifiable
in its application to the generations of men living when the genuine
plan of salvation was upon the earth. Those living contemporaneously
with the Gospel plan might respond to the invitation to come and bask
in its saving sunshine. {179} The justice, however, of placing a bar to
the entrance into God's kingdom in the way of people who are not living
on this earth when the oracles and Gospel of the Redeemer are upon it,
is questioned. It is argued that surely a just God could not and would
not exclude from the benefits of saving truth the myriads of honest
souls who have lived out their "brief hour" in this sphere according to
the best light they possessed, and passed along to the next. Those who
raise this point "Do err, not understanding the Scriptures."

The great Gospel plan is both comprehensive and grand. It is worthy
of the Great Being who instituted it for the redemption of His
children. But how ignorant, because of sectarian gloom and apostasy,
are the people concerning the magnitude of the Gospel scheme, and the
far-reaching nature of its saving power and principles. By the magic
touch of truth, aided by the scriptures, we hope to shed a ray of light
upon this subject. We propose to show that the Gospel is not only
applicable in the process of saving the living, but includes within its
broad folds, salvation for the dead. The reader need not be startled
at this proposition. It is strongly supported by the Bible, which, if
he profess to be a Christian, he should surely be ready to accept as
competent authority.

The preaching of the Gospel of life and salvation is not confined to
this life. "Glad tidings of great joy" are also conveyed to the spirits
of the dead, in the sphere in which they dwell pending the resurrection
of their bodies. In addition to His mission on earth the Redeemer
performed another in the spirit world. Before He consummated His mortal
ministry by suffering an ignominious death, he spoke of his prospective
labors in the sphere beyond, when he said, "Verily, verily, I say unto
you, the hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God: and they who hear shall live." (John v, 25.)

Some will, in a contumacious spirit, contend that he spoke in a
figurative sense, of the "dead in trespasses and sins." This is an
untenable position, for why should he speak of a purpose to do in the
future that which he was at the same moment engaged in, being then in
the act of addressing the unrepentant Jews? But the 28th verse of the
same chapter is sufficient to explode the flimsy subterfuge. It shows
that he had reference to those whose bodies were at that time sleeping
in the comb, "Marvel not at this; for the hour is coming, in the which
all that are in their graves shall hear his voice." This was spoken
too, in connection with an assertion that {180} those who were obedient
should come forth at the "resurrection of the just."

Let not the reader suppose that the subject of salvation for the dead
is merely treated upon by a few passages of scripture. In Peter's
1st epistle iii chapter, 18th and 19th verses, there is a definite
statement to the effect that after Christ was "put to death in the
flesh," he was "quickened by the spirit, by which also he went and
preached to the spirits in prison." The object of this preaching to
the departed spirits of men is plainly defined in the 6th verse of the
following chapter, being "That they be judged according to men in the
flesh but live according to God in the spirit." The object was the same
as that of the declaration of the words of life to the living; to bring
the ungodly to repentance and newness of life.

Even the Protestant religion does not entirely ignore the visit of
the Redeemer of the world to the shades of the departed, although
the recognition of the important fact is given in an undefined and
ambiguous way. This is because of a lack of understanding, in the
absence of the spirit of revelation, of the Scriptures. The great
truths of the Bible can only be comprehended by the investigator being
in possession of a portion of the spirit that inspired the speakers
and writers of the divine record. However, the 3rd and 4th Articles
of Religion state that "Christ died for us and was buried, so also is
it to be believed that he went down into hell." Also that "he rose
again from death, took again his body of flesh and bones, wherewith
he ascended into heaven." It will be seen that the sphere which Peter
informs us is for the confinement of the spirits of departed humanity,
is denominated in the "Articles of Faith," as "hell," but both point to
a visit by Christ to a place or condition differing essentially from
heaven or earth.

This position is borne out by the Savior's own declaration to Mary,
when he forbade her to touch him, for the reason that he had not yet
ascended to His Father. This shows he had not yet been to heaven. He
had been engaged in the work entrusted to Him by the Father, among the
intelligences that had once existed on the earth. This accounts for
the remark of Jesus, while hanging upon the cross, to the thief who
suffered a similar fate at the same time: "To-day shalt thou be with
me in paradise." Some unadvisedly suppose the thief went direct to
heaven. On the contrary it is evident he went to a place where departed
spirits abide until the resurrection. Christ, as we have shown by the
remarks of Peter, went to {181} such a place, in the spirit, during
the time intervening between His crucifixion and resurrection. The
word paradise, therefore stands for such a place, for on the same day
on which the promise was made to the thief, the latter's spirit was to
be in the Redeemer's presence. There he could be taught of the Lord of
heaven and earth and, if so disposed, "Live according to God in the
spirit."

The reader may endeavor to find other objections to our proposition
that the saving message and power of the Gospel reaches the dead who
die in ignorance of it. He may take issue with us upon the saying of
the Savior, heretofore quoted, "Except a man be born of water and of
the spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God." This, being a rule
devoid of exception, it may be a question as to how those who have died
without a knowledge of the Gospel can possibly gain an entrance into
the heavenly kingdom, in view of the impracticability of a spirit's
being baptized by immersion, or "born of water." We at once admit that
a spirit cannot personally comply with this ordinance, excepting in
one way. A departed intelligence can have that ordinance performed by
substitute, and his acceptance of that performance will constitute,
according to the statutes of the Gospel, compliance with the law, and
entitle him to the privileges of the kingdom of God.

We trust the reader will not suddenly, in his feelings, object to the
vicarious administration of the ordinance of baptism in water. Baptism
for the dead is Scriptural, and is a saving provision of the Almighty
God, showing the magnitude of His mercy. Let us turn our attention
to the 15th chapter of Corinthians. Paul offers strong reasoning in
support of the resurrection of the body. One of the most potent of his
points was that if the heretics who declaimed against that sublime
doctrine were right, the ordinance of the being baptized for the dead
would be a useless performance. Paul was, of course, right, for the
chief object of such an ordinance must be to entitle the dead, among
other blessings, to a part in the resurrection. This agrees with the
announcement of Jesus, to the effect that the dead would soon hear his
voice, and they who did good would have part in the resurrection of
the just. Here are the words of Paul: "Else what shall they do which
are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they
then baptized for the dead?" Thus even the dead are not exempt from the
exceptionless rule laid down by Christ, that the birth of water and of
the spirit is an imperative condition of entrance into the kingdom of
God. The only difference between the living and the dead is that the
{182} former are required to receive it in person and the latter by
proxy.

How easy for the reader to say, I do not believe one person can do
anything in connection with salvation that will affect another. But
were such an objection valid, the whole fabric of Christianity would be
swept away. That saving plan is built upon this very principle. "As in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. xv, 22).
The atonement is a vicarious work. Who shall say that Christ has not
done a saving work for us? He died that we might live!

The principle of one being representing another runs throughout the
whole of the dispensations of God to men. We have already stated
that the atonement was vicarious, and this is the foundation of
Christianity. The whole mission of the Savior was a work based on the
law of substitution in another respect. He came as the representative
of the Father. He represented neither himself nor his own doctrine. "My
doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his (the
Father's) will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of myself", (John vii, 16, 17). How often He announced,
in the meekness of his spirit, "I came not to do my own will, but
the will of my Father who sent me." He was the substitute, deputy or
representative of that Great Being who, after his baptism in water, at
the hands of John, to "fulfill all righteousness," proclaimed him his
Son.

So is the law of substitution exhibited in the sending forth of the
ancient disciples. They were the representatives of Jesus Christ, to
perform His work, not their own. Neither had they power to do any
work save it was in His name, so that through them as His deputies or
substitutes, did He accomplish His purposes. So emphatically did they
represent Him that those who rejected them committed the rebellious
crime, in that act, of rejecting Him, and consequently of rejecting
the Father also. Thus it will be seen that substitution runs through
the whole superstructure of genuine Christianity, and cannot be
consistently cast aside or even treated slightingly.

The first object of baptism is that the repentant believer receiving it
may obtain a remission of sins. If this be the result sought and gained
by obedience to this law in the case of a living person, so must it
be in the cases of the dead who receive this ordinance by the law of
substitution. Paul says we are buried with Christ "by baptism into his
death; that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the
{183} Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life", (Rom.
vi, 4). Thus, in connection with the baptism for the remission of sins,
the disciple engages to refrain from evil-doing in future, by adopting
a "newness of life." So also do the spirits of the departed, whom Peter
informs us had the Gospel preached unto them, that they, might reform,
by "living according to God."

The reader may be seized with a momentary feeling of astonishment at
the innovatory character of this doctrine upon existing so-called
Christian systems of religion. The latter, so far as Protestantism is
concerned, teach that the condition of human intelligences cannot be
affected, so far as a reformatory process is concerned, after death.
Jesus Christ, speaking of the "sin against the Holy Ghost," said,
that "All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men,"
excepting this one. Of this unpardonable offence He said: "It shall not
be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come"
(Matt, xii, 31, 32). This announcement of the Redeemer implies the
application of a forgiveness or remission of sins in the world to come.
Else what would be the use of stating it as a fact that this special
sin could not be forgiven in the world to come. Why thus particularize
it in reference to the future life, unless it were an exception to the
rule? The only sensible inference to be drawn from the statement is
that other sins are forgiven in the future life. The plain meaning of
the passage is that all other sins shall be forgiven either here or
hereafter. The mode of obtaining that forgiveness or remission of evils
committed is the same in the case of the dead as the living, being
through the application of the law of baptism, received by proxy by the
former and in person by the latter.

Were it suited to our purpose, we might show that every law of the
Gospel, being eternal, compliance alone with the conditions of the
same brings the promised blessing. The application of the statutes of
heaven is universal, whether to the living or the dead. If the latter
are required to have the law of baptism attended to in their behalf to
entitle them to a remission of sins, so must the birth of the spirit
be undergone to ensure for them an entrance into the kingdom of God.
For, "Except a man be born of water and of the spirit", he cannot enjoy
that blessed privilege. If the vicarious principle in the Gospel plan
require the birth of the water for departed spirits, so also must the
laying on of hands be received in the same manner--by substitute. Thus
we might go on to exhibit to the admiring contemplation of the lovers
of truth {184} the exceeding greatness of the scheme of redemption,
consistent, yet simple in every part. Showing also the mercy and
justice of the Most High, who has provided for the eternal peace of all
his children who will obey his laws.

Let us contemplate for a moment those contracted systems which confine
the application of the saving power of the Gospel to this life, as
compared with the infinitely broad plan of which Christ is the head.
Every professing Christian pretends to believe that "There is none
other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved,"
except that of Christ. Myriads of human intelligences come upon this
earth and pass away without ever hearing of the name of the Savior.
Are these immortal beings to be kept in outer darkness throughout
eternity? While revolving ages roll around, shall no ray of salvation
ever illumine the gloom of their prison house? And this because they
did not bow in submission to a name with the sound of which their ears
had never been saluted? Where would be the justice of such a state of
facts? Yet salvation can only be made attainable through the name of
our blessed Savior. Let us rather consider the magnanimity and justice
of our Heavenly Father, by admitting that the gates and "everlasting
doors" are lifted up, and the message of the King of Glory carried to
the captives, that they may be set free.

How otherwise would we suppose that the Redeemer could be the ultimate
victor, conquering "death, hell and the grave," triumphing over the
unavailing efforts of the Devil to drag humanity down to eternal
darkness. The number of human intelligences receiving the message of
Christ in this life is insignificant compared with the teeming hosts
who either never heed or never hear His name. Yet it is only through
his name that redemption can be procured. Therefore were the Gospel
trumpet not sounded, nor salvation offered in the spheres beyond, it
would not be Christ but the arch-adversary who would, in the great day
of the Lord, sound the note of victory. Salvation for the dead as well
as the living is not only Scriptural, but it appeals to our reason, as
the only scheme consistent in magnitude and mercy with the character
and attributes of the King of Heaven.

We have shown, in the foregoing pages, that the preaching of the Gospel
to, and the vicarious performance and administration of its eternal
ordinances for the dead, are in strict harmony with the doctrines
of the holy Scriptures. The application of the saving principles of
the Divine system to the {185} dead has been clearly explained as a
necessity, to make the work of human redemption complete, rendering our
Great Captain, Christ, the triumphant victor, and Satan the prostrate,
vanquished foe. The mighty host of the redeemed, as compared with
those who will be destroyed as "vessels of wrath," will be as the
vastness of the oceans to the insignificant stream. Those doomed to
everlasting ostracism from each and all of the mansions and kingdoms of
the Father, prepared as places of glory and rest for His children, will
be comparatively few, as all manner of sin shall be forgiven unto men,
either in time or eternity, except the one crime which is unto eternal
death--the sin against the Holy Ghost. A just and merciful God has not
created man that he might forever endure eternal misery, but rather
that he might dwell in realms of everlasting joy.

It is generally taught that after death there are but two separate
and distinct divisions--heaven and hell--into the first of which the
righteous are admitted, and into the second the wicked are thrust. In
either one it is believed, by most professing Christians, that there
are no degrees of bliss or exaltation on the one hand, or exquisiteness
of torture on the other. But how such unreasonable views can be
entertained, in the face of the plain declaration of Scripture, is not
easily accounted for.

In explanation of the grand fact that there were many dwelling places
in the sphere beyond, Jesus said to his disciples, "In my Father's
house are many mansions; if it were not so I would have told you. I
go to prepare a place for you", (John xiv, 2). In the following verse
Jesus assigns as a reason for this preparation that it was for the
purpose of having them dwell in His presence, "That where I am there
ye may be also." There can be no other inference drawn from this
statement than that there will be others who will dwell in the mansions
of the Father, the kingdoms of our God, who will not enjoy the exalted
privilege of being in the immediate presence of the Redeemer.

How beautiful is the explanation of the Apostle Paul upon the doctrine
of degrees. Speaking of the condition of those who have died and shall
be again quickened into life by the power of the resurrection, he says:
"There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial, but the glory
of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another.
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and
another glory of the stars; for one star differeth {186} from another
star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead" (1 Cor. xv,
40-42). Here are three distinct degrees, mansions or kingdoms that are
spoken of, and how appropriately are they compared to the shining orbs
that illumine the heavenly expanse. The analogous figure used to convey
to the mind a glimmering of the innumerable differences that will
exist in the third grade of the final abodes of human intelligences,
immediately impresses the mind with the minuteness of detail in the
provisions of the divine scheme, in the wonderful adaptability to the
capacities and conditions of an infinite variety of individualities.
Not only is there a condition of future existence that will be as the
stars compared with the greater lights that revolve in space, but in
that plane of existence there shall be differences as peculiar and
apparently as numerous as those which characterize the shining worlds.

In speaking of the merciful providence of the Most High in preparing
ultimate abodes suited to the capacities of His children, surely Paul
was a good authority. Not only was he able to speak advisedly by the
manifestations of the Spirit of Truth, that was in him by virtue of
his holy apostleship, but he had, while still a dweller in mortality,
been made an actual partaker of the glories of the other world. He had
received a foretaste of the exquisiteness of heavenly bliss, having
been, by the goodness of God, made a visitant to one, at least, of the
future degrees. Speaking of his personal experience, he said: "I knew a
man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot
tell; God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven" (2 Cor.
xii, 2). Taking this statement, as all professing Christians should,
as worthy of credence, the only logical conclusion to be arrived at is
that there are at least three heavens, the mention of a third rendering
the existence of two others imperative. For our part we will accept
the statement of an authority like Paul in preference to that of a
wholesale combination of uninspired expounders and commentators, who
stand upon different ground from that taken by him.

Those who sleep in Christ shall be raised from the dead at His coming
with power and great glory, in the latter days. They shall reign with
him on the earth a thousand years. During that blissful period the
vicarious work for the dead shall proceed, until the work of redemption
shall be complete, and all, at the end of that time of rest, the
thousand years--"one clay with the Lord,"--the dead, both small and
great, shall be raised. Then shall come the judgment. The {187} sons of
God, the intelligences whom He created for His glory, shall be assigned
to the mansions and kingdoms for which they have fitted themselves,
by their course in this life and while in the spirit. And all shall
acknowledge that God is just, and merciful, and full of loving
kindness, and shall give glory to Him who sitteth upon the throne and
to the Lamb forever and ever.

There is an unbroken harmony between the teachings and announcements of
Jesus and all the ancient prophets and apostles with those of Joseph
Smith, who was raised up to usher in the great last dispensation.
This beautiful blending should strike the investigator as remarkable.
He should inquire whether a system so complete could possibly be the
product of mere human ingenuity. It certainly is a most striking and
unusual phenomenon. This unanimity of doctrine, principle and sentiment
is all the more astounding in view of the otherwise heterogeneous,
discrepant and conflicting religious maelstrom presented by so-called
Christendom. This blending of the teachings of the ancients with those
of the modern prophet is at least refreshingly new in this age of
frenzied religious perplexity.

Let us consider the statements of Joseph Smith in regard to the future
conditions of the human family, side by side with the utterances of
the Savior and the Apostle Paul. At Hiram, Portage County, Ohio, U. S.
A., the modern prophet and Sidney Rigdon were permitted to behold a
glorious vision, by which their minds were opened to a comprehension of
this great subject. A portion of what they saw they were commanded to
write and is published in section 76 of the latest edition of the Book
of Doctrine and Covenants. Concerning those who place themselves beyond
the pale of redemption, by committing the sin against the Holy Ghost,
it is written: "Thus saith the Lord concerning all those who know my
power and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves,
through the power of the devil, to be overcome, and to deny the truth
and defy my power--They are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom
I say that it had been better for them never to have been born, for
they are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the
devil and his angels in eternity; concerning whom I have said there is
no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come."

Speaking of those who shall come forth in "the resurrection of the
just," it is stated: "They are they who received the testimony of
Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized {188} after the
manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this
according to the commandment which he has given, that by keeping the
commandments they might be washed and cleansed from their sins, and
receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is
ordained and sealed unto this power," etc.

    "These are they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of
    the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the
    sun of the firmament is written of as being typical.

    "And again we saw the terrestrial world, and behold and lo, these
    are they who are of the terrestrial, whose glory differs from that
    of the Church of the First Born, who have received the fullness
    of the Father, even as that of the moon differs from the sun in
    the firmament. Behold these are they who died without law, and
    also they who are the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the
    Son visited, and preached the Gospel unto them, that they might
    be judged according to men in the flesh, who received not the
    testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards received it. These
    are they who are honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by
    the craftiness of men. These are they who receive of His glory but
    not of His fullness. These are they who receive of the presence of
    the Son, but not of the fullness of the Father; wherefore their
    bodies are terrestrial, and not bodies celestial, and differ in
    glory as the moon differs from the sun, etc.

    "And again we saw the glory of the telestial, which glory is that
    of the lesser, even as the glory of the stars differs from the
    glory of the moon in the firmament. * * * These are they who shall
    not be redeemed from the devil, until the last resurrection, until
    the Lord, even Christ the Lamb shall have finished his work."

Whether the reader receive our testimony to the fact that Joseph Smith
was a prophet or not, he at least cannot truthfully deny that between
his teachings and those of the Bible there is a connecting chain
binding them together in a harmonious whole. Not only is this beautiful
blending manifested in the statements made in the foregoing pages,
but in all the great principles enunciated by the latter-day prophet.
The more the candid truth-seeker investigates the subject, the more
will this unanimity become apparent, as a result of his unprejudiced
researches.

All the holy prophets, from the beginning of the world, have taken
up the theme of the glorious coming of the Son of Man in the latter
days, to reign on the earth. In connection with this stupendous event
they have depicted, in graphic and prophetic measure, the terrible
scenes that are to precede it. The wicked who will not listen to the
mandates of heaven are to be swept from the earth by judgments, as
with the overwhelming rush of a flood. Famine, plague, pestilence,
war, commotions, uprisings and destructions, in all the most appalling
forms, will visit those who delight in revelling in the {189} filth
of iniquity that now rises as an offence in the sight of the hosts of
heaven. The period of those tribulations, which have already begun to
appear, has been characterized as the "Great and dreadful day of the
Lord." This fearful time, "when the wicked shall slay the wicked," is
a necessity as a preparatory process before the coming of the King
of Kings. A millennium--a reign of righteousness and peace--would be
an impossibility with myriads of human beings on the earth that are
sunk in the slough of corruption, delighting in deeds of violence and
strife. They repent not, and to introduce purity and peace, those
whose lives are in contravention of, instead of in harmony with those
conditions, must be blotted out of existence. Therefore it is decreed
in the heavens that those who remain at His coming will be those only
who will bow to His sceptre, deporting themselves in accordance with
righteousness and truth.

Were it not for the realization of a glorious promise the earth,
because of the corruption of those living upon it, would be smitten
with an irretrievable curse. The nature of that promise is set forth in
the 5th and 6th verses of the last chapter of Malachi: "Behold, I will
send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful
day of the Lord. And he will turn the heart of the fathers to the
children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come
and smite the earth with a curse."

What a beautiful and singular harmony is presented between the
nature of this great promise and the principles set forth in the
present writing--the Gospel to the dead as well as the living. In the
dispensation of the meridian of time, introduced by the Redeemer in
person, the heavenly message of glad tidings was, as herein exhibited,
not only to men dwelling in the flesh, but also to those living in the
spirit. The Latter-day Saints claim that the latter-day dispensation
was opened by the raising up of the Prophet Joseph Smith. That great
and good man, and his brother Hyrum, Patriarch of the Church, met a
fate similar to that of the Savior. They were slain by a furious mob
of religious bigots, for no other reason than asserting that God had
again spoken from heaven as of old. Like the ancient prophets they
clung to their integrity with their latest breath, and sealed their
testimony with their blood. But, like their great Master, their mission
was not confined to the sphere of the living. As in His case, it
extended also to that of the spirits of the departed. Hence, when the
prophet had accomplished the work by revelation from God, of setting
up the true Church of Christ, with {190} apostles and prophets, high
priests, seventies, elders, priests, teachers, deacons, and every
other officer, and all the necessary councils, courts and other
organizations, as in former days, he was called hence to open up a new
and later dispensation in the life beyond. The work he had been the
honored instrument in inaugurating here could be perpetuated, under
divine guidance, by those remaining behind who held similar priesthood
and authority to that which had been conferred upon him, and which
belongs to him in eternity. That same commission that enabled him to
perform a work here, is of effect in the realms beyond the grave. Thus
an unbroken chain is formed, welding the visible Church of the First
Born on this side with the same eternal system behind the veil. By
this means there is established a common bond of union between the
children--the obedient in this generation--and the fathers who have
passed to the other sphere.

Malachi, whom we have quoted, spoke the words of inspiration, and we
claim they have received a literal fulfillment. If our reader profess
to be a believer in the Bible he must, to be consistent, either accept
as a truth that Elijah the prophet has come, or that he will come some
time in the future. Seeing the finger of prophecy points to the coming
of that departed prophet, for a special purpose, our claim that his
visit is an accomplished fact is worthy of investigatory consideration.
We declare that he actually appeared to the Prophet Joseph Smith and
Oliver Cowdery, in a temple that had been reared by the Latter-day
Saints, and dedicated to the Lord for holy purposes, at Kirtland, State
of Ohio, United States of America. This visitation occurred on the 3rd
of April, 1836. They were visited by others of the ancient prophets
successively on the same occasion, each conferring upon them the keys
and authority pertaining to his special dispensation, that all the
powers pertaining to each might be incorporated in the most stupendous
of them all--that of the latter days to prepare for the coming of the
Son of Man. We quote from the account of the event, given on page 405
of the latest edition of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants: "After
this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon
us, for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting
death, stood before us and said--Behold, the time has fully come, which
was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi, testifying that he (Elijah)
should be sent before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come, to
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the
fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse. {191} Therefore
the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands, and by
this ye may know the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even
at the doors."

From the hour that that glorious vision was opened to the view of those
whose eyes were favored to behold it, the effects of the visit of the
great Elijah took root, until the outspreading branches from the seed
then sown have extended to the uttermost parts of the earth. A great
work is in progress, but because "darkness covers the earth and gross
darkness the people," the world comprehend it not. This is because
they are not repentant, neither are they born of water and of the
spirit, without which process man cannot even see, to say nothing of
entering, the kingdom of God. The elders of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints are carrying the Gospel to the nations, travelling
without purse and scrip, as in olden times. Great companies of those
who believe their testimonies are departing for the gathering place
of the Church, month by month and year by year. A leading influence
that causes them to wend their way to the appointed land where the
latter-day Zion is to be built up, is the turning of their hearts
to the fathers who have passed before them without the privilege of
embracing the plan of salvation on the earth. Baptism, confirmation
and other ordinances can only be attended to in holy structures called
temples, reared to the Most High for sacred purposes. The Saints flock
together to aid in the rearing of such buildings, that they may enter
them and officiate for the fathers who have gone before, that they may
be "judged according to men in the flesh, live according to God in the
spirit," and have part in the blessings and privileges of the Gospel of
the Redeemer.

Thus are the words of Malachi fulfilled, in the turning of the hearts
of the children to the fathers. The children are manifesting their
solicitude for the salvation of the dead by their works. The Saints, in
the fruitful valleys of the mountains of the north-western portion of
America, are engaged in the building of temples to the God of Heaven,
and they operate in full faith of co-operation on the part of the
fathers for whom they are working. They have abundant evidence that
the turning of their hearts to the fathers is met with a responsive
reciprocal echo from the spirits of the departed, to whom the Gospel
is being preached. One temple, devoted to the performance of vicarious
and other ordinances, is completed and two others are in the course
of construction. It is a portion of the faith of the Saints also that
the great work of redemption of the dead will be prosecuted throughout
{192} the Millennial reign, until, at the end of the thousand years
of peace, Christ shall have put all things under his feet, being
the great conqueror of "death, hell and the grave." When the great
work of redemption is completed, He will present the Kingdom, in its
perfection, to His Father, who shall tell His Only Begotten to retain
it and reign over it for ever and ever.

We are aware of our inability to present even a remote portrayal of the
greatness of the glorious plan arranged in heaven for the redemption of
humanity. But however faint the result of our endeavor, it is perhaps
sufficient to show that the saving plan bears upon it the stamp of
Deity. It is a system that, because of its magnitude, magnanimity and
beauty, appeals to the intellectual, moral and religious nature of man.
And when the hosts of the redeemed shall sing the new song of praise to
God and the Lamb, it will be the manifestation of a clear comprehension
of so grand a scheme, taking within its broad folds not only living
races of men but, stretching wide into eternity, embracing all things
that were, that are, and that still lie in the bosom of the future.

Summary.

It may be well to consider what, in the foregoing pages, we have
been successful in establishing. The points which have been the most
conspicuously and clearly defined may be stated as follows:

_Firstly_.--That the true Church of Christ is, in the nature of its
doctrines, principles, authority, gifts, power and organization,
peculiar and distinct from all other systems.

_Secondly_.--That the sects claiming to be Christian widely differ in
numerous essential vital particulars from the true Church as described
in the Scriptures, this discrepancy being sufficient to invalidate
their claim to being the Churches of Christ. It would be illogical and
unscriptural to assume that anything that differs from that which is
true can possibly be in itself correct.

_Thirdly_.--That apostasy from the original and pure order of the
Gospel as established by Christ and His divinely commissioned servants,
is clearly foretold in Holy Writ; and that the discrepant condition
of professing Christian Churches is an existing proof of the genuine
character of those predictions.

_Fourthly_.--That a latter day restoration of the true Gospel is
prophetically promised in the Scriptures. The setting up, {193} by
revelation, of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, after
the ancient pattern, sustains the validity of the prophecies given to
that effect.

_Fifthly_.--That the comprehensive and far-reaching nature of the
Gospel renders it applicable to the whole human race; that, consistent
with its intrinsically liberal character, it provides for the correct
teaching, improvement and ultimate salvation of the dead as well as the
living. This fact alone should cause a sentiment of adoration to ascend
to God from the heart of every human being to whom it is communicated.

_Sixthly_.--That the sectarian dogma of one universal heaven and hell,
making but two distinct ultimate abodes for the multifarious grades of
human intelligences, is an unscriptural fallacy, inconsistent with the
just decree that men shall be rewarded according to their works.

_Seventhly_.--That the Scriptures promise a visit, before the end of
the rule of wickedness, from Elijah the Prophet, to restore the keys
and powers pertaining to the turning of the hearts of the children to
the fathers, etc. In verification of the claim put forth by the Saints
that that prediction has been fulfilled, the feelings of the children
are being strongly inclined to their progenitors.

_Eighthly_.--That the propositions advanced are not only sustained by
appeals to reason, but are so markedly scriptural that we are surely
not claiming too much in assuming that the professed believer in Holy
Writ is left with but two alternatives to choose from. He must either
discard the sacred record as unworthy of his retention, or accept of
the doctrines and principles herein set forth and clearly established.

Appeal and Testimony.

We appeal to every unconverted soul to whose notice these words shall
be brought, to stop and reflect upon the importance of the message we
declare. The note of warning is not to one nation or people, but to
this whole generation of men. The proclamation of the Gospel, that
was to be delivered by a holy angel in the latter days, was to be to
"every nation, kindred, tongue and people." It was to be universal.
None were to be exempt; not even those who would be professed followers
of the Savior, for all were to be, at the time of the beginning of the
restitution of all things, out of the way of the True Shepherd.

Reader, we appeal to you to step forward and, with an unbiased mind,
investigate, that you may be able to intelligently {194} decide whether
or not the claim of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints be
legitimate or otherwise. Be "fearless of the world's despising," for
this was the independent position assumed by the former-day disciples
of the Redeemer. Think of the great prize that awaits him who listens
to the voice of the True Shepherd, rather than to the alluring popular
praise of the multitude, and endures to the end.

We not only plead with you to consider the eternal welfare of your
own soul, but, in the name of Jesus Christ, we testify to you that
God the Eternal Father, has at last broken the speechless gloom of
centuries. He has spoken from heaven and established his authority
on the earth. If you have, by evil and false reports regarding the
Saints, been surrounded by prejudice, break down the repulsive barrier.
Draw the bolts and throw open the shutters of your mind, that the
glorious sunlight of eternal truth may enlighten your soul with its
illuminating beams. Remember the Saints of former days: how they were
vilified, abused, maltreated and murdered for the truth's sake. Search
diligently for the truth as it is in Christ, and when you have found
it, treasure it as a gem of priceless value. It will lead you to seek
for a duly commissioned servant of the Most High God, and inspire you
to request him, after you have repented of your sins, to baptize you
for the remission of the same, and to lay hands upon your head that
you may receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; for thus did the ancients.
Your thus becoming "like a little child," by obedience to the Lord's
will, makes you a citizen of the kingdom of God, and by continued
faithfulness, you can _know_, and not merely _believe_, that the
doctrine, instead of being human, is divine.

Liverpool, England, January 12th, 1880.

Footnotes:

1. _First Principles_--John iii, 5; Luke vii, 29; Mark xvi, 15, 15;
Matt. xxviii, 19; Acts ii, 38, 39; x, 48; Mark i, 4; Luke iii, 3; Acts
xxii, 16; Matt. iii, 6; Acts viii, 12, 36, 38; Rom. vi, 4; John iii, 23.

2. _Authority Needed_--Heb. v, 4; Luke xxiv, 49; Acts xiii, 2-4; Rom.
x, 14, 15.

3. _Gifts_--1 Cor. xii chap.; John xiv, 26; Acts xix, 6; Mark xvi, 17,
18.

4. _Organization_--Eph. iv. 11-13; 1 Cor. xii, 14-15; 17-29.

5. _Apostasy_--Isaiah xxiv, 5; 1 Tim. iv, 1-3; 2 Tim. iii, 1-5; iv, 3,
4; 2 Thess. ii, 1-3.

6. _Restoration_--Rev. iv, 1; xiv, 6, 7; xxii, 8, 9,; Matt. xxiv, 14.

{195}



THE MEANS OF ESCAPE, OR, EXISTING EVILS AND THEIR CURE.

By John Nicholson.

An Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.

    "Now learn a parable of the fig tree: When his branch is yet
    tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh; So
    likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is
    near, even at the doors."--Matt. xxiv. 32, 33.

We live in strange times. Human affairs are hastening to a crisis.
International struggles are imminent, "nation rising against nation,"
for supremacy and existence. Civilized governments are threatened by
an internal and destructive agency, in the form of communism. This
secret combination assumes different names and forms, according to the
fancy of its devotees and the various stages of its advancement. It is
Communism in France, Socialism in Germany, Internationalism in Spain
and Italy, Nihilism in Russia, and similar sentiments and principles
are cloaked under a variety of titles in America and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain. These societies are opposed in spirit to all the
restraints of law; they are an increasing power, causing thrones to
totter and soon, through their agency, governments will crumble and
fall.

On February 9th, 1831, the great Prophet of the latter-days received
a revelation from God, on this subject. He was told to instruct the
elders of the Church who should go to the east, to "teach them that
shall be converted to flee to the west, and this in consequence of that
which is coming upon the earth, and of _secret combinations_." The
prophecies in the Book of Mormon are plain on this subject, stating
that "secret combinations to get power and gain," should be among the
nations in the latter times, and would be a sign that the destruction
of those governments in which they should exist would be near at hand.

The prevailing conflict between capital and labor is {196}
irrepressible, strikes being of almost daily occurrence. The increase
of labor-saving machinery is creating over-stocked markets. This
and other causes create a decline in trade for which there is no
cure. Consequently the condition of the poorer classes grows from
bad to worse. They will continue in that situation until driven, by
desperation, to deeds of violence, scenes of anarchy and bloodshed will
ensue and Babylon shall fall. "The merchants of the earth shall weep
and mourn over her; for no man buyeth her merchandise any more" (see
Rev., chap, xviii).

Secularism and infidelity are sweeping over the nations like a mighty
flood. Having broken through the restraining influence of religious
feeling, the masses are plunging into a vortex of ruin, by indulgence
in every species of iniquity. Crime is increasing with such rapidity
that the cities of the world are fairly reeking with corruption. The
earth is in "commotion" with the news of "famines, pestilence, wars
and rumors of war." It has almost come to the point when "men's hearts
are failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which
are coming on the earth." (Luke xxi, 26.) The present phase of things
is because the world has been for centuries and is now in apostasy
from the true order of the Gospel. Isaiah (xxiv, 5), being enabled to
behold, by prophetic power, the existing condition of affairs, said:
"The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because
they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the
everlasting covenant."

Speaking of what should be previous to the second coming of Christ,
Paul said (ii. Thess. ii. 3), "Let no man deceive you by any means; for
that day shall not come, except there come a _falling away_ first, and
that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition."

The reader may say: "I can clearly see the perplexing dilemma the world
has reached, but it is easier to point out an evil than the means of
escape from it." It is not our intention to leave the matter in a
maze of doubt, for as surely as God, through His servants, predicted
the "falling away," when men should have "a form of godliness but
denying the power thereof;" so also, by the voice of revelation, did
He proclaim that, in the latter times it would be restored. (Rev. xiv.
6.) "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
to every nation, kindred, tongue and people." Also, in telling his
disciples what should be the signs of his coming, Christ gave as one
of them (Matt. xxiv. 14): "And {197} this gospel of the kingdom shall
be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then
shall the end come."

We make the solemn declaration that the fullness of the everlasting
Gospel, with all its gifts, authority, and blessings has been restored,
through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith, in this age.
This restoration came not by the will or power of man, but by the power
of the Living God.

We extract the following from an article under the head of "Church
History," written in 1842, by Joseph, the Prophet:

    "I was born in the town of Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, U.
    S. A., on the 23d of December, A. D. 1805. When ten years old my
    parents removed to Palmyra, New York, where we resided about four
    years, and from thence removed to the town of Manchester, U. S. A.

    "My father was a farmer and taught me the art of husbandry. When
    about fourteen years of age, I began to reflect upon the importance
    of being prepared for a future state, and, upon inquiring the plan
    of salvation, I found that there was a great clash in religious
    sentiments. Believing the word of God, I had confidence in the
    declaration of James, 'If a man lack wisdom let him ask of God,
    who giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall
    be given him,' I retired to a secret place in a grove and began to
    call upon the Lord. While fervently engaged in supplication, my
    mind was taken away from the objects with which I was surrounded,
    and I was enwrapped in a heavenly vision, and saw two glorious
    personages who exactly resembled each other in features and
    likeness, surrounded with a brilliant light, which eclipsed the
    sun at noon-day. They told me that all religious denominations
    were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them was
    acknowledged of God as His Church and Kingdom. And I was expressly
    commanded to 'go not after them;' at the same time receiving a
    promise that the fullness of the Gospel should at some future time
    be made known unto me."

On the 21st of September, A. D. 1823, Joseph Smith was visited by an
angel from the courts of glory, who instructed him further regarding
the coming forth of the work of the Lord in the last days. This
heavenly messenger informed him concerning certain plates that were
hid in a hill, and on which was recorded the history of two races of
people who had inhabited the American Continent, one descended from a
small colony that was led out of Jerusalem about 600 years B. C.; and
the other from a company that was led to the American Continent by
the power of God, at the time the Lord confounded the language of the
people who built the Tower of Babel. Those records, together with the
Urim and Thummim, by means of which sacred instruments he was enabled
to translate them, were committed to him, producing what is known as
the Book of Mormon. This record is in exact harmony with the doctrine
and principles contained in the Scriptures of {198} the Old and New
Testaments, and embodies many prophecies that have been fulfilled, many
that are now being verified and others relating to events still in the
future.

On the 15th of May, 1829, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were visited
by John the Baptist, an angelic messenger from God, by whom they
were ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood, which holds the keys of the
ministering of angels and the gospel of repentance and of baptism by
immersion for the remission of sins. Subsequently, by direct revelation
from God, they were ordained to the Melchisedek Priesthood, which holds
the keys of the laying on of the hands for the reception of the Holy
Ghost. They were also commissioned to ordain others to the same great
authority and to organize the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, which was done on the 6th day of April, 1830, in the town of
Fayette, Seneca County, State of New York, United States of America.
From that time the work spread in every direction, the word being
confirmed by signs following the believers, as it was anciently, when
holy men of old went forth administering among the people by the power
and authority of the God of Israel.

In ancient times nearly the whole of the Prophets, and the Saviour
Himself and His Apostles, were the objects of bitter persecution. The
introduction of the same principles, in this age, has produced the same
effect. From the time Joseph Smith received his first vision till now,
the work which he was the honored instrument in establishing has met
with the most intense opposition. The Saints were robbed, plundered,
and many of them slain by ruthless mobs in the States of New York,
Ohio, Missouri and Illinois, the Prophet himself and his brother, Hyrum
Smith, having been martyred in cold blood, on the 27th of June, 1844,
in the last named State. Finally the Saints, being driven from the
haunts of civilization, sought out a home in the northwestern wilds of
America, which, by the practical working out of the principles for the
espousal of which they were derided, driven, and "everywhere spoken
evil against," they are fast causing to "blossom as the rose," by the
blessing of God.

The Saints, under the organization of the Church of Christ, as it
existed anciently, with Apostles and Prophets, High Priests, Seventies,
Elders, Bishops, Priests, Teachers, Deacons, Helps, Governments, etc.,
are establishing a purer and better order of society than exists
anywhere else on the earth. They are progressing, by the application
of measures for the benefit of the whole people, to that unity that
will prepare them {199} to receive the Lord Jesus Christ, whose
coming we declare to be near at hand. Strikes and other evils that
are distracting the social systems abroad are unknown among them.
The Saints are nearing a union of sentiment and action that causes
peace to abound among them and comparative plenty to prevail. Under
the guiding spirit of inspiration from God, the people are being
educated to a higher standard of morality in its broadest sense,
including the business relations of life. By the gradual introduction
of co-operative institutions, involving mutual interests, they are
successfully progressing to the desirable point of unity in temporal
as well as spiritual things. They are building up settlements, towns
and cities, in which peace prevails and the hum of industry and song of
rejoicing are heard. They are erecting Temples and Tabernacles for the
administration of the sacred ordinances and the worship of the True and
Living God. This noble work is being done by people of a great variety
of nationalities, heretofore of different customs and habits, speaking
different languages, but infused with one spirit, into which they have
been baptized, which is the Spirit of Christ.

The Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are
not hirelings, who "divine for money." At the call of the Saviour,
they cheerfully sacrifice the interests of business and the comforts
and endearments of home, going forth, like the disciples of old, to
every part of the world where they can find an opening. Their message
is to call upon the people to believe in God, the Eternal Father and
in His Son, Jesus Christ; to repent of their sins, be baptized in
water, by immersion, for the remission of the same, receive the laying
on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost and obey the great
command--"Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins and that ye receive not of her plagues." (Rev. xviii. 4.)

Many thousands are heeding the warning and are gathering from the
nations with the Church year by year, for this is the ark of safety
provided for the righteous from the abominations and calamities of the
last days.

Hear it, O ye inhabitants of the earth, for we bear witness, in the
name of Jesus Christ, that God has again spoken from the heavens and
revealed the everlasting Gospel, for the salvation of all who believe
and obey. It is a law of the Scriptures that "in the mouths of two or
three witnesses shall every word be established," and there are tens of
thousands who can testify to the truth of these things.

Liverpool, England, November 15th, 1878.

{200}



The Latter-Day Prophet.

By John Nicholson.

An Elder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.

Prophets Needed and Should be Expected--Organism of the Church
of Christ--Effects of Obedience to the Doctrines Introduced by
Joseph Smith--The Book of Mormon Authentic--Modern Prophecy and its
Fulfillment.

Was Joseph Smith an authorized prophet of God? This is a question of
momentous importance. Like every matter involving the weal or woe of
mankind, the answer should not be given in haste. The evidence should
be carefully scanned and weighed before a decision is reached. He who
jumps at conclusions regarding men and things, whether for or against,
without a scrutinizing examination, is liable to err in judgment.
Such a person is likely also to be guilty of injustice. In addition
to the vital interests involved, that kindly liberality that should
characterize the behavior of man to his fellow, requires that a plea
in behalf of the divinity of the mission of Joseph Smith should be
candidly and impartially considered.

The popular voice is against the validity of the claim of Joseph Smith
to being a true prophet. Public sentiment on such a subject has no
force. If it have any bearing upon it at all it must be favorable,
because of precedents. If popular repudiation is evidence against the
genuineness of Joseph Smith's claim, it would be equally sensible to
recognize its potency as directed against the rejected Redeemer of the
world, whose sufferings and death were effected by the tide of the
popular will. The same may be as readily applied to nearly the whole
of the holy prophets since the world began, against whom the waves of
popular feeling, as a rule, surged like the waters of an angry sea.

{201} The prevailing idea regarding prophets is that, in the language
of the generality of so-called Christian teachers, "they are not
needed now. They were merely required to establish the Church of
Christ in its incipiency." Of course some excuse must be advanced for
the non-existence of divinely commissioned and inspired men in the
various churches. It would not do to say such men are needed, because
the question as to why they do not have them would immediately arise.
However, we think it is not only an easy matter to show, scripturally,
that such men are not only needed, but that the existence of the true
Church of Christ without them is an absolute impossibility.

We direct the reader to the 4th chap, of Paul's Epistle to the
Ephesians. The 8th verse says: "When he (Christ) ascended up on high,
he led captivity captive and gave gifts unto men." Now read from
the 11th to the 14th verse, inclusive: "And he gave some, apostles;
and some, _prophets_; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and
teachers; for the _perfecting of the Saints_, for the _work of the
ministry_, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come
to a _unity_ of the _faith_, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. That we _henceforth_ be no more children, tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men,
and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive."

Take the assertions of the apostate so-called Christian Churches in
regard to the non-essentiality of inspired apostles and prophets and
place them in juxtaposition with the teachings of Paul, and what do
we discover? We observe the widest discrepancy between them. Those
inspired men were given to the Church "for the perfecting of the
Saints." Consequently, before it can be established that they are no
longer needed it must first be proved that the Saints or members of the
Church have reached perfection. To claim that this is the case would be
too glaringly absurd in the face of existing facts. Imperfection being
the evident condition of the professors of what is termed Christian
religion, the necessity of the agencies appointed of God to bring about
a more perfect state must be admitted as reasonable and scriptural.

Another object of the existence in the Church of inspired apostles and
prophets, etc., was "the work of the ministry." They being appointed
of God, and not of men, for that purpose, to assume that because they
do not exist in the churches is sufficient evidence that they are
not required is equal to an {202} assumption that "the work of the
ministry" is unnecessary. The untenable claim that men endowed with
divine authority and prophetic gifts were only necessary in the rise
of the primitive Church flies before the scriptural statement that
they were to remain "till we all come to a unity of the faith." An
unprejudiced, dispassionate Christian reasoner will at once freely
admit that the present distracted, divided, embittered, controversial
condition of Christendom presents anything else than a united state,
which inspired men were commissioned, by heavenly teachings, to bring
about. The desirableness of that unity is most clearly defined, in the
reason that, "we _henceforth_ be no more children, tossed to and fro
and carried about by every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men."
That is plainly the present condition of religious affairs, the people
being wafted about by every whimsical, sensational breeze of doctrine.
It is made a matter of lucrative trade by mercenary individuals, to
play upon the wayward, flitting religious sentiments of the misguided
masses. We say to the people, be not deceived by those who "make
merchandise of the souls of men," by teaching the repudiation of
inspired apostles and prophets. Those holy men can alone relieve the
earnest worshipper from being engulfed in the turbulent sea of doubt
and place his feet upon the steadfast rock of certainty.

There can be no question as to the present existence of prophets,
through whom the will of God could be taught, being desirable. Then,
the Almighty being just and unchangeable, why should it be considered
unlikely that He should give good gifts to men now as well as
anciently? If the people now are as deserving as the ancients were,
why should the present generation be denied the enjoyment of equal
privileges in relation to being divinely taught? Surely there can be no
reason.

Among the innumerable unfounded false popular impressions regarding
the Latter-day Saints is one to the effect that they do not believe
in the teachings of the Old and New Testaments. Some of the more
ignorant people go so far in misconception of their true character as
to be imbued with the utterly preposterous idea that they do not even
believe in the Savior at all. The very name of the organization--the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints--a title we claim to have
been given by revelation from God, should be enough to explode the
latter fallacious view. And in regard to the belief of the Saints
in the teachings and doctrines of the Bible, the organism of the
ecclesiastical body should be evidence enough on that point. All the
officers and councils named in the New Testament are included in it;
hence there are apostles, high priests, {203} seventies, elders,
bishops, priests, teachers and deacons, the duties and functions
of those several offices of the genuine priesthood being clearly
understood and defined. It is required that every officer should
understand the character of his position and the relationship he
sustains in it towards all other authorities, producing the most
desirable unity and beautiful harmony.

This symmetrical perfection, this shapely figure, the result of the
most exquisite niceness of organization and completely detailed
definition of the functions of each portion of the body-religious is,
in our view, a very decided evidence of the divinity of the mission
of the great prophet of the nineteenth century. It accords with the
frequently recurring scriptural figure by which the true Church of
Christ is compared, in its perfection of parts and harmonious blending
of divisions, to the human body. The preservation of this completeness
is an absolute necessity. How can the human bodily structure be deemed
perfect when it is decapitated, when denuded of its extremities, or
when the trunk is lacerated or divided into pieces? No detached part
can, in its separate capacity, be denominated a body, neither can the
organism be called perfect when deprived of even the most inferior of
its members. How then, on the same ground, can a church, as compared to
a body, be called the Church of Christ if it repudiate or is devoid of
apostles, prophets, high priests, seventies and other vital parts that,
according to New Testament teachings, comprise necessarily the most
important portions of that harmonious organization inaugurated among
men by the Savior of the world and His ancient apostles?

How anxious the Apostle Paul was to impress upon the minds of the
people the positiveness of the necessity for the preservation of the
organization of the Church in its entirety. Hear what he says on the
subject, 1 Cor. xii. 14-21: "For the body is not one member, but many.
If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body;
is it therefore not of the body? And if the ear shall say, Because I am
not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? If
the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were
hearing where were the smelling? But now hath God set the members every
one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him. And if they were all
one member, where were the body? But now are they many members, yet
but one body. And _the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of
thee; nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you_."

{204} To show that Paul had special reference, in his advocacy of
the preservation of the body in the perfection of its parts, to the
officers and gifts of the Church, it will profit the reader to peruse
the 27th and 28th verses of the same chapter: "Now _ye_ are the body of
Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set some in the Church,
first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that
miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of
tongues."

After this pattern has the Church, revealed anew in this age, been set
up through the instrumentality of the young man Joseph Smith who, like
his Divine Master, was slain on account of the testimony he bore to a
perverse generation; and our reader may well pause and ask himself the
vital question, where else in all the world can I find a church similar
to that of ancient times?

But we hasten to explain other and equally potent evidences that
establish the divinity of Joseph Smith's mission and the validity of
his claim to being a prophet. We will first consider the character of
his teachings and administrations and their effects upon those who
accept them. He announced that the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand;
that the Lord was about to commence His marvelous latter-day work, by
preparing for the coming of the Savior. He and his associate apostles
and prophets taught the same Gospel that Christ and the ancient
apostles preached: Faith in God the Eternal Father, in His Son Jesus
Christ, repentance of sins, baptism, by immersion, for the remission of
sins, and the laying on of the hands of those holding divine authority
for the bestowal of the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

The elders of the Church constantly preached these doctrines and
they are explained so clearly in many pamphlets and more extensive
published works, that it is not our purpose to enter upon an elaborate
dissertation regarding them in this writing. In fact so plainly are
these the doctrines taught by Christ and His apostles, in the same
order as they are given in the preceding paragraph, that a labored
explanation in support of them should be unnecessary to convince any
consistent, intelligent, professing Christian that they are strictly
biblical, and, without exception, absolutely essential.

What we wish more particularly to refer to now is the promise given to
the obedient believers of the bestowal upon them of the Holy Ghost. No
impostor could make such an offer without subjecting himself to the
certainty of discovery. Here was a distinct assertion that a clearly
defined effect would be produced by a plainly stated cause, the former
being the {205} reception of the Holy Ghost, produced by obedience
to the doctrines and ordinances before enumerated. Here was an offer
exactly similar to that made to the people in ancient times. Christ and
the ancient apostles promised that the obedient should _know_ of the
doctrine, and miraculous signs should follow the believer. They "laid
their hands upon them and they received the Holy Ghost." How easy it is
to test this matter.

The question now to be considered is this: Is the promised effect
really produced upon those who obey the doctrines taught by Joseph
Smith and incorporated in the faith and practice of the Church he was
instrumental in establishing? If the affirmative of this question can
be proved, then it follows that he was indeed a prophet of the Living
God, specially raised up and appointed. What greater evidence could be
given than the testimony of those who have tested the efficacy of the
promise for themselves. As to the extent and existence of this proof
we have but to refer the reader to the scores of thousands of members
and officers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. These
will unhesitatingly testify that, as an effect of their obedience, they
have received the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, by whose operations it has
been manifested to their minds that God has begun a marvelous work in
the earth, having commenced to set up the Kingdom whose existence is
prophetically predicted in the second chapter of Daniel. An application
to this source will also inform the inquirer that the gifts promised to
believers exist in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Proceeding upon the legitimate assumption that the effect of obedience
to the requirements of the doctrines of faith, repentance, baptism for
the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands, does produce the
promised imparting of the Holy Ghost, what is the proper conclusion? It
must be that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet, for the reason that the
giving of the Holy Ghost necessarily shows divine recognition. No such
effect could possibly result from the teachings and administrations of
an impostor.

The reader may say that he is not willing to accept of the testimony
of the Latter-day Saints, on the ground of the probability of their
being interested witnesses. What reason would he have for supposing
then, that he would have received the evidence of the Former-day
Saints? They were open to the same objection, if it be one, and they
had no more proof to advance that their claim was valid than is now
offered in support of the same Gospel restored in its power in these
days. One thing is very evident in this connection: there is but one
{206} process by which the position of the Latter-day Saints can be
consistently refuted. That is by the testing method, which is open to
all. It consists of implicit compliance with the conditions stated to
be requisite to insure a personal testimony or witness to the obedient.
Until the opponents of the divine system take this course, consistency
would appear to demand that they hold their peace, lest they be,
ignorantly or otherwise, found fighting against God. However, as the
Saints know, experimentally, that honest truth-seekers receive, through
obedience, the witness of the Spirit, they know the work they are
engaged in is secure from successful assault from that method.

The reader has probably been heretofore misled regarding the faith and
doctrines professed by the Latter-day Saints, and may consequently be
surprised at their being identical with the teachings of the Bible. He
has perhaps been under the impression that the Old and New Testaments
were discarded and what is known as the Book of Mormon adopted instead.
Such an impression, which is only too general, is altogether erroneous.
It is true, however, that, in addition to the Bible, the Saints accept
the Book of Mormon as a divine revelation, it being in accordance with
the genius of their faith, to adopt whatever the Almighty chooses to
offer for the information and salvation of His children.

We are aware that, in consequence of the false teachings of uninspired
men, who "teach for hire and divine for money," the people generally
have a prejudice against receiving any revelations not contained in the
Bible. They have been erroneously informed that the canon of Scripture
is full, and God would no more speak to His children, but preserve
the gloom of an unbroken silence towards them. What an unnatural and
unreasonable doctrine this is! Yet, to delude the ignorant into an
acceptance of this discouraging dogma, those who drag religion down to
the degrading position of a mere mercantile basis, triumphantly quote
the 18th and 10th verses of the last chapter of Revelation: "If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that
are written in this book; and if any man shall take away from the words
of the book of _this_ prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are
written in this book."

To offer this passage as evidence of the fullness of the scriptural
canon is exceedingly absurd. It simply had reference to the enlargement
or reduction of the book of John's prophecy, for at the time it
was written the Bible had not been {207} compiled. Consequently it
could have no reference to the Old and New Testaments, which are a
compilation of various books. It is certainly right that man should
not, with impunity, add to or take from what God has revealed, although
the Almighty can certainly do so at any time, according to His good
will and pleasure. However, should the Lord, in His mercy, reveal
another book or prophecy, it would be distinct of itself and not
necessarily an addition to one that He had already given, and might
relate to another subject, as in the case of books in general, which
are books of themselves and not mere additions to others.

There is a regrettable lack of information regarding the Book of
Mormon in the world at large. It will be profitable to first consider
the manner in which this record was, by the matchless power of God,
brought to the light. This will necessarily have to be done briefly. If
the reader desire more detailed particulars, he can obtain them by a
perusal of more elaborate writings, which can be had through any of the
authorized agents of the Church.

In the year 1820, when Joseph Smith was in the fifteenth year of his
age, he resided, with his parents and other members of the family,
in the town of Manchester, Ontario County, New York, United States
of America. There was, in that vicinity, at that time, a religious
revival, causing him to be seriously impressed with a desire to serve
God. The conflict of jarring sects caused him perplexity as to which he
would be justified in joining. Being struck with the reasonableness of
the scriptural promise that God would give wisdom to those who asked
Him for it in faith, he retired to a wood or grove, and prayed for the
information of which he felt he stood so much in need.

In answer to his fervent and simple petition, a glorious vision opened
to the gaze of the suppliant youth. A radiant pillar of fire appeared,
descended and encircled him about. In the midst of this brilliant
column were two glorious personages, the brightness of whose presence
was beyond the power of human description, eclipsing that of the sun
when he shines in noonday splendor. One of those heavenly beings spoke
to Joseph, calling him by name and saying, pointing to the other, "This
is my beloved Son, hear him."

Joseph, when sufficiently recovered from the sensations that possessed
him, inquired which of all the sects he should join. The personage who
addressed him commanded him to identify himself with none, as all had
gone astray, and were an abomination in His sight. "They draw near to
Me with their lips, {208} but their hearts are far from Me; they teach
for doctrine the commandments of man, having a form of godliness, but
they deny the power thereof." He was also told many other things of
great importance.

How forcibly the honest inquirer must be struck with the clearness with
which the position of the sects was portrayed by these holy beings--the
Father and the Son. Religious professors have a form of worship but
deny revelation, and the power of godliness made manifest by the
exercise of miraculous gifts; they also repeat printed prayers which,
being manufactured by others, cannot proceed from the hearts of those
who mechanically utter them.

Joseph obeyed the command he received, to abstain from joining any of
the religious denominations. On the night of September 21st, 1823,
after having retired to bed, he was engaged in fervent prayer to the
Almighty for the forgiveness of his sins, and a manifestation that
would satisfy his mind as to his standing before the Lord.

While thus employed a personage of great beauty, dressed in white
raiment, presented himself before him. The room was lighted up by the
glory of his presence, the brightness of the light being most intense
in close proximity to the person of this heavenly being. The name
of this visitant was Moroni. He told Joseph that God had a work for
him to do that would cause his name to be spoken of for good or evil
among all people. We will here quote from the personal history of the
prophet: "He said there was a book deposited, written upon gold plates,
giving an account of the former inhabitants of this continent, and
the source from whence they sprang. He also said that the fullness
of the everlasting Gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the
Savior to the ancient inhabitants; also that there were two stones in
silver bows--and these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted
what is called the Urim and Thummim--deposited with the plates; and
the possession and use of these stones were what constituted seers in
ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose
of translating the book."

This holy messenger gave Joseph many precious instructions relative to
the coming forth of the record, and the setting up and establishment
of the work of God in the last days, quoting several passages from the
prophecies of the Bible, notably the third chapter of Malachi; eleventh
chapter of Isaiah; third chapter of Acts; second chapter of Joel, from
the twenty-eighth to the last verse. These predictions, he stated, were
soon to be fulfilled. Joseph was also shown, by {209} the opening of
the vision of his mind, by the power of the Almighty, the place where
the plates were deposited. He was visited twice subsequently by the
same personage, the same night, and on each occasion the instructions
given on the first visit were repeated.

Passing over many intermediate circumstances which transspired up to
the time of the plates with the Urim and Thummim being committed to
the charge of the youthful prophet, it must suffice, in the present
writing, to state that he received them from the Angel Moroni, on the
22nd day of September, 1827.

The prophet copied a number of the characters, which were very finely
engraved on the plates, and, by means of the Urim and Thummin,
translated some of them. These were taken by Martin Harris, to
Professor Anthon, of New York, who stated that the translation was
correct. On being shown the portion of the transcript that was not
translated, he said the characters were Egyptian, Chaldiac, Assyriac
and Arabic, and that they were genuine characters. The professor gave
Mr. Harris a certificate to that effect, but on learning that the young
man Joseph had the plates revealed to him by an angel, he demanded it
back and tore it up, saying there was no such thing now as ministering
of angels. He requested that the plates be brought to him and he
would translate them. Mr. Harris replied that a portion of them was
sealed and he was forbidden to bring them. Professor Anthon retorted,
"I cannot read a sealed book." Mr. Harris also visited Dr. Mitchell,
whose statement coincided with that of Professor Anthon, regarding the
genuineness of the characters and translation.

In the midst of great difficulties and perplexities, out of all of
which Joseph and the friends the Lord raised up to him were delivered
by His matchless power, the work of translation was completed and the
Book of Mormon was finally published, in the early part of the year
1830.

Limited space will not admit of a detailed account of the narrative
portion of this remarkable record. This information can best be gained
from the Book itself. It contains an account of the doings of the
righteous and the wicked of the ancient inhabitants of America. It
includes information relative to the dealings of God with the people,
describing the works of many mighty prophets, seers and revelators.
The sayings of these inspired men have slumbered in the dust for ages,
but have spoken again from the ground in deep and piercing tones, in
accordance with the recorded promise of our {210} heavenly Father
regarding the accomplishment of His marvelous work in the latter days.

The Prophet Isaiah must have beheld the coming forth of this record as
a testimony to all men of the care which the Almighty has exercised
over the nations of men, in every part of the earth, in all ages.
Hear his words as found in the 29th chap., 11th to 14th verse: "And
the vision of all is become to you as the words of a book that is
sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this I
pray thee: and he saith, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the book is
delivered to one that is not learned, saying, Read this I pray thee:
and he saith, I am not learned. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch
as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do
honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear
toward me is taught by the precept of men. Therefore, behold, I will
proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work
and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid."

So truly have the words of Isaiah received a verification, that some
portions of the passage just quoted read like a record made subsequent
to the transpiration of the events to which they allude.

In the interview between Mr. Harris and the learned Professor Anthon,
the latter actually said, "I cannot read a sealed book." The youthful
Joseph, diffident and unlearned, was enabled, by the gift and power of
the Almighty, to read the historic narrative of the mighty races of the
past, and give to the world a book, the authenticity of which is proved
by evidences that cannot be successfully controverted. The unlearned
youth received the power to accomplish this because the set time had
come for the fulfillment of the promise of the Most High to begin a
marvelous work in the earth; not by the esteemedly wise and learned,
but by humble instruments, that no flesh might glory in His presence.

Many people appear to be contracted in their views regarding the
dealings of the Almighty with His children. They conclude that the
Bible must necessarily be the only record of signal manifestations
of the power of Omnipotence in behalf of mankind. Such a view is
biblically incorrect, for that good book speaks of the great works
to be performed in the gathering of Israel in the latter days. It is
reasonable to anticipate that when those occurrences take place, an
account of them will be written and published, that it may be perused
with {211} wonder and thanksgiving by future generations. The record
thus made will be as clearly sacred history as the Bible itself.

The question as to the origin of the American Indians is a subject of
deep interest to many advanced minds. Investigation for information
bearing upon it has received a powerful impetus by discoveries of the
ruins of vast cities and gigantic aqueducts, requiring the exercise of
great architectural and engineering skill in their construction. These
and other relics of past races, abounding in Central, the southern part
of North, and in South America, give indisputable evidence of these
regions having been inhabited, many centuries ago, by multitudinous
enlightened populations that had attained a high state of civilization.
The Book of Mormon, which gives an authentic history of those peoples,
dissolves the mystery that heretofore enshrouded this department of
research. It tells who those people were and from whence they sprang.
It tells of a small colony, by commandment of God and led by His
all-powerful hand, leaving Jerusalem, and after hazardous journeyings
landing on the shores of America. It gives an account also of another
party, consisting of Jews, going to the same continent subsequently,
and amalgamating with the descendants of the first colonizers. A brief
historical sketch is also given of a colony that left the Tower of
Babel at the time of the confusion of languages.

The existence of the ruins indicating the former presence of great
populations, well advanced in arts and manufactures, was unknown to
Joseph Smith when he translated the Book of Mormon, yet the closest
scrutiny and comparison that have yet been given have failed to show a
single discrepancy betwixt the record he was the instrument in bringing
forth and publishing and even the most recent discoveries, to which we
have not space, however, to refer.

These ruins give unmistakable proof that remarkably advanced races have
dwelt on the American Continent in the ages of the past. How reasonable
it is to suppose that our Heavenly Father should have manifested
Himself to them as He did on the Eastern Hemisphere. And if it be fair
to infer that He did so exhibit His goodness and loving-tenderness, the
subsequent inference that a record of these divine operations would be
kept is equally so. How natural also to expect that He, as in the case
of the Bible, would not suffer such a history to be lost, but rather
that He would preserve it for the general benefit of erring humanity,
that they might have additional testimony concerning a crucified
and risen Redeemer. If the world would receive it, what a powerful
combination the {212} two records--the Bible and Book of Mormon--would
make. The one relates to the dealings of God with His people in the
eastern part of the world, and the other in the west. They both
harmonize, each testifying of the same everlasting plan of salvation,
through the atonement of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Hear the words of Ezekiel, 37th chap., 19th verse: "Say unto them, Thus
saith the Lord God; behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is
in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel, his fellows, and will
put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one
stick, and they shall be one in mine hand."

It is well understood that the meaning of stick is a book or record,
the Jewish custom being to have the law and history written upon a long
scroll of parchment, rolled upon a stick. The Book of Mormon is the
stick of Joseph. With the exception of the Book of Ether, relating to
the Jaredites, who sprang from a colony that left the Tower of Babel at
the time of the confusion of languages, the record gives the history of
a branch of the house of Joseph, Lehi, the head of the little colony
that emigrated from Jerusalem to America six hundred years before
Christ, being a lineal descendant of Manasseh. According to revelations
given in these days, the overwhelming majority of the people composing
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are of the blood of
scattered Ephraim, to whose hands the record or stick of Joseph is
confided, as prophesied by Ezekiel.

We hold that Jesus Christ not only manifested Himself to His disciples
at Jerusalem, establishing His fold--His Church--in that region, that
His sheep might be protected and fed, but He did the same in other
parts of the earth. Is He not the Shepherd of all those who are willing
to serve Him? Did He not say to His ancient Jewish disciples, "Go
ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature?" He
required them to go to every part of the earth that was then known on
the eastern hemisphere. This did not include the American Continent.
Are we to infer from this that, because of the inability of these
witnesses, from lack of geographical or other information, which God,
in His wisdom, may have seen fit to withhold from them, the peoples
of the great western continent should be left without a knowledge of
a crucified and risen Redeemer? Surely this would be tantamount to an
imputation of injustice against Omnipotence, as there is no other name
under heaven whereby salvation can be obtained except that of Jesus.
{213}

With the loving Redeemer the welfare of His sheep, or disciples, was
His constant theme and anxiety. On one occasion He was conversing on
this subject with His Jerusalem flock, when He uttered the following
statement, as recorded in John 10th chap., 15th and 16th verses: "As
the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father; and I lay my life
down for the sheep. And _other sheep I have which are not of this fold;
them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall
be one fold and one shepherd_."

The plain inference to be drawn from this clear statement is that
there were other sheep or people who would become disciples of Christ
that had not yet heard His voice, but should hear it. It is evident
also that the Palestine disciples were unacquainted with the sheep to
whom the Savior alluded. He here expressed His intention to establish,
among those _other sheep_, His fold, or Church, similar to the one in
Palestine, comprising apostles, prophets, seventies, elders, and all
the other officers, gifts and powers, the fold of Christ being the same
wherever found, there being but one fold and one shepherd.

The question now to be considered is, Who were the other sheep to
whom Jesus referred? The Book of Mormon unfolds this mystery. From
page 501 to 540 of the last edition of that record will be found an
account of the visit of the Redeemer to the Nephites, shortly after
His crucifixion and resurrection at Jerusalem. It is one of the most
beautiful and pathetic narratives it has been our lot to peruse. His
wonderful ministrations and exhibitions of power are described in
simple but explicit language, and details of His selection of twelve
special witnesses or disciples, and the organization of His fold, or
Church, are given. This history, replete with divine instruction,
explains the import of the remark of Jesus to His disciples at
Jerusalem. He informed the Nephites of the statement He made to
the Jews in reference to them, and said the reason He did not tell
them more was because of the weakness of the faith of His flock in
Palestine. He also informed the Nephites that He had received a
commandment from the Father to visit the Ten Tribes of Israel.

"In the mouths of two or three witnesses shall every word be
established," are the words of the sacred book. What shall we say then
about the evidence of the witnesses whose testimony is appended to the
Book of Mormon? Three men, besides the Prophet Joseph Smith, solemnly
declare to all people that they beheld with their eyes the plates with
engravings, containing the record, and the angel who manifested {214}
them; also that they heard the voice of God from heaven declaring
these things to be true and faithful and commanding them to bear
record concerning them to all the world. None of these witnesses
have ever denied their testimony. Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris
have gone behind the veil, but David Whitmer, at this date, still
lives. He severed his connection with the Church, but still bears a
disinterested testimony to the truth of the solemn statement published
in connection with the Book of Mormon. No longer since than September,
1878, Elders Orson Pratt and Joseph F. Smith visited Mr. Whitmer, who
was residing in Richmond, Missouri, U. S. A., and at the interview he
gave many interesting details in reference to the angelic ministration,
the plates and other important matters. An account of the visit was
published in numbers 49 and 50 of Vol. 40 of the Millennial Star. He
has also been interrogated by many persons having no connection with
the Church, his testimony being unvarying as to the Divine authenticity
of the Book of Mormon.

Eight other witnesses testify to having beheld and handled the plates
and seen the hieroglyphical engravings thereon. True, wicked, designing
men have endeavored to destroy the validity of this testimony by
fabricating absurd stories regarding the origin of the Book of Mormon.
This is an old device of Satan and his emissaries to cover up the truth
and destroy the work of God. Such machinations are similar to the
attempt that was made by leading Jews to induce the Roman soldiers to
state that the body of Christ had been carried away, so that a belief
in His resurrection might be stifled. The testimony of the witnesses
stands unimpeached, and is in force in all the world, being directed to
every nation, kindred, tongue and people.

The social structures of the nations are being undermined and
threatened by a strange revolutionary movement. Thrones and empires
seem to be almost trembling in the balance. This is notably the case
with the great Russian despotism. The spirit of murder and incendiarism
seems to be in the air, filling the high ones of the earth with
affright. Foul murder and destructive fire are born of the plottings
of secret societies, organized for purposes of assassination, power
and plunder. All civilized nations are more or less affected by this
hideous affliction, which hangs over some of them like an incubus. It
is a sign of the times. The prophet Moroni, by whose hands the plates
of the Book of Mormon were hid up in the Hill Cumorah, wrote concerning
this very condition. He knew that his words would come forth and be
published to the Gentiles, {815} in the latter days, and he directed
a prophetic statement to them, which will be found on page 588 of the
last edition: "Wherefore, O ye Gentiles, it is wisdom in God that those
things should be shown unto you, that thereby ye may repent of your
sins, and suffer not these murderous combinations to get above you,
_which are built up to get power and gain_, and the work, yea, even the
work of destruction come upon you. * * * Wherefore the Lord commandeth
you _when ye shall see these things come among you_, that you shall
awake to a sense of your awful situation, _because of this secret
combination which shall be among you_." The same prophet also says:
"And whatsoever nation shall uphold such secret combinations, to get
power and gain, until they shall spread over the nation, behold, they
shall be destroyed.

What could be plainer than the fulfilment of these predictive words,
establishing the prophetic character of the record. If the objector
should interpose that he does not believe this prediction was made
fourteen hundred years ago, that would not help his side of the
question, as it would be a mere shifting of the prophetic mantle from
the shoulders of Moroni to those of Joseph Smith. At the time the book
was translated and published those secret murderous combinations were
almost non-existent compared with their present extent, foothold and
power. They now exist to a greater or less degree in all nations, and
will continue to increase until they create what the Book of Mormon
terms "a great division among the people," and every man's hand will be
against his neighbor.

At Kirtland, Ohio, U. S. A., Feb. 9, 1831, a revelation was given
through Joseph, the Seer, on this very subject, the following passage
occurring: "And behold, it shall come to pass that my servants shall be
sent forth to the east and to the west, to the north and to the south;
and even now, let him that goeth to the east, teach them that shall be
converted to flee to the west, and this in consequence of that which is
coming on the earth, and of _secret combinations_." Let the inhabitants
of the earth take warning, for as the Lord liveth and He has spoken
by the mouths of His prophets, a dark and evil day is at the doors.
God has decreed that the earth shall not much longer groan under the
oppressive influence of misrule and misery.

It is stated in the Book of Mormon that the prophets among the ancient
Nephites, being permitted to behold, by prophetic power, that their
descendants would drift into great wickedness, and in consequence, be
destroyed by the Almighty, as He had decreed that every people upon
that land who would {216} not keep His laws should be swept away when
they should be fully ripe in their abominations. They therefore, by
faith and prayer, to the Father in the name of Jesus Christ, obtained
a promise that a remnant should remain, and that the record which had
been kept should be preserved, and carried to them by the Gentiles in
the latter days.

We prefer to give the exact words of the prophet Nephi, which will be
found on page 122, latest edition:

"And now I would prophesy somewhat more concerning the Jews and the
Gentiles. For after the book of which I have spoken (Book of Mormon)
shall come forth, and be written unto the Gentiles, and sealed up again
unto the Lord, there shall be many which shall believe the words which
are written; and they shall carry them forth unto the remnant of our
seed. And then shall the remnant of our seed know concerning us, how
that we came out from Jerusalem, and that they are descendants of the
Jews. And the Gospel of Jesus Christ shall be declared among them;
wherefore they shall be restored unto the knowledge of their fathers,
and also to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which was had among their
fathers, and then shall they rejoice, for they shall know that it is a
blessing unto them from the hand of God; and their scales of darkness
shall begin to fall from their eyes; and many generations shall not
pass away among them, save they shall become a white and delightsome
people."

These words have received a literal fulfillment. In the first place,
many have believed "the words which are written," the tens of thousands
of Latter-day Saints who have accepted the Book of Mormon as an
authentic record bearing ample witness to that fact. This prophecy was
uttered over two thousand years ago, and yet the facts incorporated are
as plain as if penned subsequent to their accomplishment. The skeptic
may say he does not believe in the ancient character of the record, and
therefore of the prophecy; but that it originated with Joseph Smith.
That would not make the position of the unbeliever much more tenable,
as it would be merely shifting the prophetic gift to other shoulders,
for the Book of Mormon was published before the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints was organized, and consequently before Joseph
Smith could possibly have known, by ordinary natural means, that many
would believe the words of the book.

But, to the other portion of the prediction. The book or history has
been carried to the remnant, by the Gentiles. From shortly subsequent
to the organization of the Church a good deal of missionary labor
was performed by the elders among {217} the Lamanites, in the hope
of bringing them to a knowledge of the Gospel. But all efforts to
penetrate their darkened minds appeared futile. The message appeared to
fall upon ears of stone. Evidently the time, in the providence of the
Almighty, for that race, who had fallen so low in the scale of being,
to accept of the knowledge that was had among their fathers, had not
arrived.

Suddenly however, as the sun breaks over the eastern horizon,
dispelling the gloom of night, a light broke forth among them. Without
effort or influence from any human source they came forward in large
numbers, declaring they had received heavenly visitations, indicating
plainly to them that they must go to the elders of the Church, be
baptized by them, by immersion, in water, for the remission of sins,
forsake their evil and idle habits, and seek for the counsel of the
servants of God. The applications for baptism and instruction were
first made to Elder George H. Hill, of Ogden, and Elder W. H. Lee, of
Grantsville, as many as three hundred waiting upon the former at one
time. The movement appeared to be simultaneous in many places, east,
west, north and south. It commenced in the summer of 1874, and has been
steadily developing ever since.

For the benefit of these people, who are descendants of a branch of
the house of Israel, three large farms have been secured by the Church
of Christ, one in Malad Valley, Northern Utah, another in Tooele
County, to the westward, and another in Thistle Valley, in the South.
They are beginning to cultivate the soil, and take on the habits of
civilization, thus commencing to fulfil the predictions of the Book of
Mormon concerning them.

The report of a conference held in the town of Ephraim, San Pete
County, Utah, U. S. A., by President John Taylor and other authorities,
last winter (1879-80), is before us. It tells of a Relief Society in
Thistle Valley, composed of white and Indian women in about equal
numbers, and of their industry and philanthropy in donating means for
the building of a Temple to the Most High. It was also represented, by
Elder Spencer, who has the oversight of the Indians in Thistle Valley,
that the Lamanitish brethren and sisters were as willing as the white
members of the Church to aid in every good work.

These may be viewed as small matters, but they are cited from the midst
of a multitude of evidences showing the educational, softening and
modifying tendency of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as preached by the
servants of God, and which {218} the ancient prophets declared would be
received by these hitherto degraded people, the aborigines of America,
and lift them to a more enlightened plane of life. It will be seen that
the leaven has already commenced to actively work among them, verifying
the genuine character of the prophecies concerning them. Whatever
manifests the authenticity of the Book of Mormon, supports the claim of
Joseph Smith to being a prophet of the Living God.

Before leaving this part of the subject, we will refer to a fact
that must strike the reader as a strong evidence of the prophetic
correctness of the Book of Mormon, and, consequently, of the
genuineness of the claim that Joseph Smith was sent of God. The book
states that the Savior gave it as a sign that when the Lamanites
(American Indians) should begin to believe its contents, the work of
the Father, to prepare the way for the gathering of the _whole_ house
of Israel should commence.

We will quote the 7th verse of the 21st chapter of 3rd Nephi, page 527
latest edition B. M.: "And when these things come to pass, that thy
seed shall begin to know these things, it shall be a sign unto them,
that they may know that the work of the Father hath already commenced
unto the fulfilling of the covenant which he has made unto the people
who are of the house of Israel."

Also the 28th verse: "Yea, and then shall the work commence, with the
Father, among all nations, in preparing the way whereby his people may
be gathered home to the land of their inheritance, and they shall go
out from all nations."

As shown in the foregoing, the aborigines have already begun to
believe, and to manifest the accuracy of the sign we have but to point
to the political events in connection with the East that have occurred
during the last five years. In that time there has transpired the
Russo-Turkish war, the Berlin Treaty, incorporating political freedom
for the Jews in Roumania; the Anglo-Turkish Convention, including the
cession of the Island of Cyprus to Great Britain, and the establishment
of a British protectorate over that portion of the Ottoman dominion
which includes Palestine. These are all occurrences confined within
the limited period which has expired since the Lamanites began to
believe and receive the Gospel. It requires no straining of points to
reconcile these events with the commencement of the preparatory work
of the Father for the gathering of the remnants of His ancient people
to their own land. The Jews themselves are beginning to recognize this
fact. So also are many professing Christians, who, although {219}
destitute of authority from Jesus Christ and devoid of the Gospel of
faith, repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying
on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost in its fullness, have some
faith in the fulfillment of the prophecies relating to the gathering of
Israel.

We think it proper to state, incidentally, that since the original
translation into English, the Book of Mormon has been translated into
and published in Welsh, Danish, French, German, Italian, the language
of the Sandwich Islanders, and Swedish. It has also been translated
into and a portion of it published in the Spanish language.

Joseph Smith, the great latter-day prophet, announced to the world
fifty years ago, that the fullness of the Gentiles would come in and
Israel be restored to the lands of their inheritance in the same
generation existing when he made the prediction; or, that there were
persons then living who would not sleep in death until all should be
fulfilled in relation to the covenant made with the house of Jacob. But
it is not till now, when the tree is so plainly putting forth its buds,
that some of the more orthodox Bible believers among the sects are
beginning to observe the portentous character of the signs of the times.

The fulfilled predictions of Joseph Smith are very numerous. But we
are only enabled in the present writing, to comparatively do little
more than touch upon his prophetic character. A prophet "is a person
illuminated, instructed, or inspired by God to announce future events."
We have, we believe, succeeded in showing that such was the calling for
which Joseph was divinely selected.

Among the subjects upon which Joseph Smith was called to exercise the
prophetic gift was the wars that were, in this generation, to produce
upon the earth, the most terrible scenes of destruction and carnage. We
here present an extract from a revelation given Dec. 25th, 1832:

    "Verily, thus saith the Lord, concerning the wars that will shortly
    come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which
    will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls.
    The days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations,
    beginning at that place.

    "For behold the Southern States shall be divided against the
    Northern States, and the Southern States will call upon other
    nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and
    they also shall call upon other nations, in order to defend
    themselves against other nations; and thus war shall be poured out
    upon all nations.

We presume our reader is aware that the first shot of the American war
of the rebellion was fired in South Carolina, {220} and that during
the progress of that fratricidal and bloody conflict, the Southern
Confederacy sent Messrs. Mason and Slidell to the Court of St. James,
with full powers to treat with the British Government to secure
the aid of the latter in accomplishing the object of the secession
from the Union of States. These are matters of history. These two
representatives of the Confederacy were brought into more than ordinary
notoriety by the fact of their having been taken, by federal authority,
from the deck of a British vessel, but subsequently liberated on demand
of the government of Great Britain.

The fact that Joseph Smith prophesied the breaking out of the American
war, together with some striking details connected with it, twenty-nine
years before its occurrence, cannot be denied, the prediction having
been published to the world almost ever since it was enunciated. This
stamps him as a foreteller of future events. As the declaration is
given with such exactness, it could not have been the result of mere
human ingenuity or foresight. In fact, so absent was the general
anticipation of such a disaster that the production was treated with
ridicule, contempt and scorn, as soon as published. From whence came
Joseph's gift to foresee and foretell? It must have emanated from a
power and intelligence greater than that naturally possessed by man. It
is evident that his mind was illuminated by the God of Heaven.

The other portion of the prediction relating to Great Britain will
also be fulfilled, as well as every word that has been uttered by the
gift and power of the Most High. She will yet call upon other nations.
The tocsin of war will sound and armed hosts will meet in the crash
of battle, for war will be poured out upon all nations. This is the
great day of preparation for the controversy of the Lord of Hosts with
the inhabitants of the earth. Europe is alive with armed men. She is
bristling with bayonets and fearful of the approach of the inevitable
conflict.

Perplexity and distress already appear. These are but the beginning
of sorrows. Knowing what is coming upon the earth, a day of calamity,
we call upon all men and women to receive the message of the Gospel,
restored to the earth in this generation, through the instrumentality
of a prophet. We call upon all to repent, be baptized by one holding
authority by immersion in water for the remission of sins, and receive
the Holy Ghost, by the laying on of hands. We testify, in the name of
Jesus Christ, that this is the will of God, manifested in these days,
by revelation and commandment.

Liverpool, England, April 6th, 1880.

{221}



THE GOSPEL OPENS COMMUNICATION WITH JEHOVAH.

Paragraphs from a sermon delivered by President John Taylor, June 12,
1853.

We contemplate with joy that the heavens have been opened, that truth
has been revealed; and the power of God developed; that angels have
manifested themselves, that the glory of the eternal world has been
made known, and that we have been made participators in that light,
glory, and intelligence which God has been pleased to reveal for the
blessings, salvation and exaltation of the human family in this time
and throughout all eternity.

We believe that God has set His hand in these last days to accomplish
His purposes, to gather His elect from the four winds, even to fulfill
the words which He has spoken by all the holy prophets, to redeem the
earth from the power of the curse, to save the human family from the
ruins of the fall, and to place mankind in that position which God
designed them to occupy before this world came into existence, or the
morning stars sang together for joy.

I know, that as other men, we have our trials, afflictions, sorrows
and privations; we meet with difficulties; we have to contend with the
world, with the powers of darkness, with the corruptions of men, and a
variety of evils; yet, at the same time through these things we have
to be made perfect. It is necessary that we should have a knowledge of
ourselves, of our true position and standing before God, and comprehend
our strength, our weakness, our ignorance and intelligence, our wisdom
and our folly, that we may know how to appreciate true principles, and
comprehend, and put a proper value upon all things as they present
themselves before our minds. It is necessary that we should know our
own weaknesses, and the weaknesses of our fellow-men; our own strength,
as well as the strength of others; and comprehend {222} our true
position before God, angels and men; that we may be inclined to treat
all with due respect, and not to over-value our own wisdom or strength,
nor deprecate it, nor that of others, but put our trust in the living
God, and follow after Him, and realize that we are His children, and
that He is our Father, and that our dependence is upon Him, and that
every blessing we receive flows from His beneficent hand.

It was necessary when the Savior was upon the earth, that He should be
tempted in all points, like unto us, and "be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities," to comprehend the weaknesses and strength, the
perfections of poor fallen human nature. And having accomplished
the thing He came into the world to do; having had to grapple with
hypocrisy, corruption, weakness, and imbecility of man; having met with
temptation and trial in all its various forms, and overcome, He has
become a "faithful High Priest" to intercede for us in the everlasting
Kingdom of His Father. He knows how to estimate and put a proper value
upon human nature, for He having been placed in the same position as
we are, knows how to bear with our weaknesses and infirmities, and can
fully comprehend the depth, power, and strength of the afflictions and
trials that men have to cope with in this world, and thus understanding
and by experience, He can bear with them as a father and an elder
brother.

Confusion, disorder, weakness, corruption, and vice of every kind are
abounding, and the whole world seems to be confused and retrograding.
The human family have departed from the principles which God has laid
down for their guidance, direction and support; they have forsaken Him
the fountain of living waters, and hewn out to themselves cisterns,
broken cisterns, that can hold no water.

Have we united with this Church because we expect to become more
honorable in the eyes of the world? No. I think this work would have
been the last ship we should have boarded, if that had been what we
sought.

Nothing but a sterling desire to do the will of God will cause men to
endure the contumely and reproach of their fellow men, and associate
themselves with the people denominated Latter-day Saints or "Mormons."

If I knew no other religion than the religions that are propagated
abroad, I would not be a religious man at all, but I would lay it all
aside, as something beneath my notice, and worship God as the great
Supreme of the Universe, according to my own judgment, independent
of the opinions of man, {223} and without having any regard to the
ridiculous dogmas taught in the world.

We believe that angels have appeared, that the heavens have been
opened. We believe in the eternal principles, in an eternal Gospel,
an eternal Priesthood, in eternal communications and associations.
Everything associated with the Gospel that we believe in is eternal.

If hell is a place of misery, and heaven a place of happiness, I want
to know how to escape the one, and obtain the other. If I cannot know
something about these things which are to come in the eternal world,
I have no religion, I would not have any, I would not give a straw
for it. It would be too low and groveling a consideration for a man
of intelligence, in the absence of this knowledge. If there is a
God, I want a religion that supplies some means of certain tangible
communication with Him. If there is a heaven, I want to know what sort
of a place it is. If there are angels, I want to know their nature, and
their occupation, and of what they are composed. If I am an eternal
being, I want to know what I am to do when I get through with time;
whether I shall plant corn and hoe it, or be engaged in some other
employment. I do not want any person to tell me about a heaven that
is "beyond the bounds of time and space," a place that no person can
possibly know anything about, or ever reach, if they did. I do not wish
any person to frighten me nearly to death, by telling me about a hell
where sinners are roasted upon gridirons, and tossed up by devils upon
pitchforks, and other sharp-pointed instruments. These notions are
traditionary, and have come from the old mother church.

I love to view the things around me; to gaze upon the sun, moon and
stars; to study the planetary system, and the world we inhabit; to
behold their beauty, order, harmony, and the operations of existence
around me. I can see something more than that mean jargon, those
childish quibbles, this heaven beyond the bounds of time and space,
where they have nothing to do but sit and sing themselves away to
everlasting bliss, or go and roast on gridirons. There is nothing like
that to be found in nature--everything is beautifully harmonious, and
perfectly adapted to the position it occupies in the world. Whether
you look at birds, beasts, or the human system, you see something
exquisitely beautiful and harmonious, and worthy of the contemplation
of all intelligence. What is man's wisdom in comparison to it? I could
not help but believe there was a God, if there was no such thing as
religion in the world.

{224} If the Kingdoms of God were governed by the same confused order
of things that are characteristic of the governments of this world, we
would have had planet dashing against planet in wild confusion, and
millions of their inhabitants sent to desolation in a moment.

Man is an intelligent being, but how far does his intelligence fall
short of that which regulates the world! He cannot even govern himself,
he never was able to do it, and never will be able until he receives
that wisdom and intelligence which comes from God. If every man can
obtain intelligence of that kind, and from that source, which governs
the world, and supplies all its wants; if he can receive it from God,
as his instructor, he is then able to govern himself, possessing
intelligence which he now knows nothing about; and intelligence which
indeed is worthy of God and man. If I cannot have a portion of that
intelligence and that wisdom, if the great Eloheim cannot impart a
portion of that spirit to me, and teach me the same lessons that He
understands, I want nothing to do with a system of theology at all.

I believe in every true principle that is imbibed by any person or
sect, and reject the false. If there is any truth in heaven, earth,
or hell, I want to embrace it, I care not what shape it comes in to
me, who brings it or who believes in it, whether it is popular or
unpopular. Truth, eternal truth, I wish to float in and enjoy.

If any man under the heavens can show me one principle of error that I
have entertained, I will lay it aside forthwith, and be thankful for
the information. On the other hand, if any man has got any principle
of truth, whether moral, religious, philosophical, or of any other
kind, that is calculated to benefit mankind, I will promise him I will
embrace it, but I will not partake of his errors along with it.

If you have got a thing that nobody can overturn, but can be sustained
everywhere; that bids defiance to the wisdom and intelligence of the
world to find one fault in it, you must say it is right, until it is
proven to be wrong.

If I have got principles which are out of the power of man to prove
false, I consider they are right, and I stand upon them as a sure
foundation.

The world is confused, it is in darkness and ignorance, and knows
nothing about God, His purposes, designs, or the object of His
creations. God knows how to touch my understanding, and how to touch
theirs; and if they live and die without a knowledge of God, and His
law, we are told that they will be judged according to the light they
have, and not {225} according to that they have not. Those that have
lived without law, will be judged without law.

If a man cannot stand up in the defense of truth, to the death, it is
not worth having, and he is not a man who is acknowledged or considered
worthy among the Saints.

Those who have received pure and heavenly principles, and lived up
to them, and kept the celestial law of God, will enjoy a celestial
Kingdom. Those who have not attained to this perfection but can obey
a terrestrial law, will receive a terrestrial glory, and enjoy a
terrestrial Kingdom, and so on. But I believe, furthermore, that there
are eternal grades of progression, which will continue worlds without
end, and to an infinity of enjoyment, expansion, glory, progression,
and of everything calculated to ennoble and exalt mankind.

    "_Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to
    be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God. A man
    filled with the love of God is not content with blessing his family
    alone, but ranges through the whole world anxious to bless the
    whole human race_."

    --_Joseph Smith, The Prophet_.

    "_If we are here by chance, if we happened to slip into this world
    from nothing, we shall soon slip out of this world to nothing;
    hence nothing will remain_."

    --_Brigham Young_.

{226}



A WORD OF ADVICE.

By Elder P. P. Pratt, in Millenial Star, 1846.

As the Elders and others in the Kingdom of God go forth in the
discharge of their duties, in proclaiming the word of the Lord and
in administering in the ordinances of the Kingdom of God, they will
doubtless find the enemy always on the alert to ensnare them if
possible and bring them and their mission into contempt. There will be
found a great need for wisdom on all occasions, that the enemy may not
gain the advantage over them.

In the first place we would advise the Elder, or whatever else he
may be, never to lose sight of his high calling of God in Jesus
Christ--never to forget the authority of that portion of the Priesthood
which has been conferred upon him. We do not give this advice in order
that the brother might be puffed up with the idea of the dignity of his
calling, by no means; neither will the contemplation of it produce that
effect, for inasmuch as we are called of God according to the order of
His Kingdom, therefore, we of ourselves have not assumed the office
which we hold, neither do we usurp an authority to which we have no
legal claim; and since it is entirely of the Lord and not of ourselves,
we shall be led to glorify Him and look for the assistance of His
spirit in discharging the varied duties of the same.

But now if an officer of the Church be brought into contact with some
one opposed to the work of the Lord, and he forgets his Priesthood and
calling, what is the result? He is left to his own resources as an
individual, which in many cases may not equal those of his adversary,
and thus he may suffer an apparent defeat in the eyes of others, and
the influence of the principles of truth may be lessened thereby.

In our own experience with the ministers of the day, we have found them
very desirous of evading the great first principles of salvation, by
calling for evidence of the truth of the Book of Mormon, which were we
to furnish, as might be done, both with regard to internal and external
evidence, as well as the researches of travelers accumulating a mass of
{227} proof as abundant as can be brought in testimony of anything, yet
it would be deemed insufficient. And why? We answer, because spiritual
things are spiritually discerned; and as no man knoweth the things of
a man, save the spirit of man which is in him, even so the things of
God knoweth no man but the spirit of God. And inasmuch as the Book
of Mormon is a divine record, so assuredly would the individual be
unable to discern the same. But he might reply that he believed the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, and was satisfied with the
evidence adduced in their favor; yes, and so would he have believed
in the Book of Mormon had it been in existence with him and he had
been taught to reverence it in a manner similar to the Bible; or we
would carry it farther and say, had the person's lot been cast in
Turkey, he would have grown up in a full belief in the authenticity
of the Koran of Mahomet. But it is not such an evidence as this that
can give satisfaction to the Saint of God. Multitudes express their
belief and full confidence that Jesus was the Savior of men, but it is
a conviction that has been instilled into the mind in early youth, and
has grown with their growth; yet still it is not an evidence that will
satisfy a child of God.

We read that no man can say that Jesus is the Christ, but by the Holy
Ghost, and on the same principle no man can speak as to the true nature
of the Scriptures, Book of Mormon, or any other sacred record, but
on the same principle; we might therefore reason with persons until
doomsday, who are not in the covenant, and yet fail to convince them.

We see then the absurdity of being led into a snare of this kind; it is
neither more nor less than this, as it were laying aside our Priesthood
and the duties of it, to endeavor by our own abilities to convince a
man that we hold before him the light of truth, at the same time that
he has no organs of vision to discern it.

But there is a ground on which the servant of the Lord can stand
securely; he can speak of the alienated condition of mankind, he can
teach the great law of adoption into the Kingdom of God, and he can
bear a faithful testimony of the reality of Christianity and of the
signs following the believer. He may enlarge on his _knowledge_ of the
Scripture by the reception of that spirit by which alone the truth can
be known, and if he be successful in securing obedience to the first
principles of truth, the work will be accomplished with regard to
establishing the truth of the Book of Mormon, as well as every other
portion of sacred writ.

We have not made these remarks because evidence cannot {228} be
adduced, but to show the irrationality of endeavoring to make a man see
without eyes, or in other words, without the capability of discerning
truth when placed before him.

Let, therefore, every servant of the Lord bear with him at all times
a consciousness of his Priesthood and calling, and when he is so
circumstanced as to find it of no avail, his labor in that quarter
is finished; for if he be not successful in the discharge of his
legitimate authority and duty, it will be utterly in vain to seek to
effect conviction in any mind by falling back upon his own acquired
resources.

If we know anything of our own assurance we would most assuredly
say that the power by which success is accomplished is to be found
in connection with a proclamation of the _fullness_ of the Gospel.
Christianity has been presented to mankind as a mere speculative
theory, without the power of godliness accompanying it, and when on
the contrary it is presented in all its glorious fullness and reality
to the honest-hearted, it becomes an agency of power which will either
prove effective, or it will be in vain to resort to other means.

Let individuals but conceive for once the glorious reality of truth,
stripped of every mixture of error, and they will turn in disgust from
the mere theoretical and heartless system with which beforetime they
may have been associated.

We do not think it will be out of place here to give a word of caution,
though we have frequently done it before, in relation to the exercise
of wisdom in all the public labors of the servants of the Lord.

Let them watch narrowly that Satan deceives them not by causing them
to lose sight of the object of their mission and calling in the
proclamation of salvation, and leading them to enlarge and dilate upon
the erroneous systems of the day. Perhaps there is no habit in which
the servant of the Lord becomes so blinded as this when he has once
indulged in it.

The absurdities in connection with modern creeds and systems are so
numerous that they appear apparently endless in the contemplation, and
if the devil can so far deceive a person as to lead him to forget the
Gospel and turn his attention to them, he will take their attention,
then he will take care that he lacks not for matter on the subject.
There is nothing to be accomplished by such a mode of proceeding,
save to exasperate the feelings of individuals, and prevent them from
receiving at our hands the word of life which we have to offer.

We make these remarks as cautionary to all, and when we call to mind,
as the result of our own experience, the individuals {229} who were the
most prone to indulge in such a course, we find them now ranked among
the apostates from the truth; and as their spirit at that time was to
destroy rather than to build up, so it is with them now, and they will
seek to overthrow the Kingdom of God with as much zest as they once
labored to overthrow the varied systems around them.

But it may be asked, have we not in the Christian warfare, power to
pull down the strongholds of sin and Satan? Truly we have; but how is
it most effectively accomplished? We answer by the establishment of the
principles of truth, by exhibiting the glorious Gospel of salvation,
and until the hearers themselves shall appreciate its truth and beauty
and turn in disgust from the deformity of those systems with which they
have been connected.

Let us draw a parallel case: We know that the Kingdom of God in these
last days shall be established, that it shall be built up and never
come to an end; but while conscious of this important fact, would it
be our business to go to every court in Europe or the world and decant
upon the evils of their various governments, and that in consequence
of the false principles upon which they are based, they must come to
destruction; certainly wisdom would not dictate such a course, but
instead thereof, let us who have embraced truth seek to build up the
Kingdom by a proclamation of those principles which shall fit men
to become citizens of the same, and teaching the great principle of
gathering, that they may be delivered from judgment, and in Mount Zion
and in Jerusalem find salvation therefrom.

There is an honor, a dignity, and a responsibility connected with the
Priesthood which we would wish should never be forgotten; it is nothing
less than to be ambassadors of Jesus Christ and when successful in that
embassy the reward shall be to shine as the stars in the firmament and
as the sun forever and forever.

{230}



A PROPHET OF LATTER DAYS.

BY ELDER EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.

A GLORIOUS THOUGHT.

Would it not be joyful news to the seeker after truth to be assured
that a prophet had been raised up in latter days? How glorious would be
the thought that the Lord had again spoken from heaven! The direct word
of God to man in this age ought to be sufficient to settle all disputes
concerning the way of salvation.

SHOULD PROPHETS BE EXPECTED IN OUR DAY?

Is it in accordance with scripture to expect prophets to come in these
latter days? Let us search the scriptures and learn what they teach.

GOD'S WORD INDICATES THAT A PROPHET SHOULD COME.

The Bible is a record of God's dealings with His prophets in past ages.
It shows that He always raised up such men whenever He intended to
perform any special work among mankind. One of the ancient prophets
declared:

    Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret to
    his servants the prophets." (Amos 3: 7)

The whole book of divine scripture confirms these words of Amos.
Whenever it mentions an important event in the world's history it
speaks of a prophet in connection with it.

PROPHETS SENT TO ANNOUNCE ALL IMPORTANT EVENTS

Before destroying the earth with a flood the Lord sent Noah to cry
repentance unto the people, that they might escape destruction if they
would obey him. In all following ages of which the Bible speaks to the
Lord sent prophets to warn the people before He brought destruction
upon them. The Savior says,

{231}

    But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of
    man be." (Matthew 24: 37).

This being true we are to expect that some prophet will be sent to warn
the world of the destruction of the wicked. That the wicked will be
destroyed at that time is evident. St. Paul says that when the Savior
comes He will take "vengeance upon them that know not God, and that
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ." (II Thessalonians 1:8).

POSITIVE PROMISE OF THE LORD TO SEND A MESSENGER.

The Prophet Malachi, speaking in the name of the Lord, says:

    Behold, I will send my messenger and he shall prepare the way
    before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his
    temple." (Malachi 3:1).

    This is another proof that a divine messenger is to be sent to
    prepare the way for the coming of the Lord. That this passage does
    not refer to His first coming is shown by the following verse,
    which reads,

    "But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when
    he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers'
    soap." (Malachi 3: 2).

NECESSITY OF PROPHETS AND APOSTLES IN THE CHURCH.

The words of Jesus show that inspired prophets and apostles are
necessary in His Church. He commanded His disciples in these words,

    "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name
    of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: TEACHING THEM
    TO OBSERVE ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER I HAVE COMMANDED YOU." (Matthew
    28: 19, 20).

If all things whatsoever Jesus commanded are to be taught today how
can one teach them unless he be inspired of God? It needs a prophet to
reveal these things anew to mankind, for the Bible does not contain
ALL the teachings and doings of the Savior. St. John in speaking
of the doings of Jesus, says that "even the world itself could not
contain the books that should be written." (John 21: 25).

CHURCH FOUNDED UPON PROPHETS AND APOSTLES.

The Apostle Paul gives us to understand that Christ's church is
founded upon apostles and prophets:

    "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but
    fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and
    are {232} BUILT UPON THE FOUNDATION OF THE APOSTLES AND PROPHETS,
    JESUS CHRIST BEING THE CHIEF CORNER STONE." (Ephesians 2: 19, 20).

POWER GIVEN APOSTLES AND PROPHETS.

Apostles and prophets in olden times were men who received power from
the Lord to act in His name.

    "And when he called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them
    power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all
    manner of sickness and all manner of disease." (Matthew 10: 1).

    "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and
    whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."
    (Matthew 18: 18).

They were also men who "spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost."
(II Peter 1: 21).

OBJECT OF INSPIRED MEN IN THE CHURCH.

St. Paul tells why apostles and prophets and other officers are in the
Church.

    "For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry,
    for the edifying of the body of Christ: . . that we henceforth be
    no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
    wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness,
    whereby they lie in wait to deceive." (Ephesians 4: 12, 14).

HOW LONG THEY SHOULD REMAIN.

He shows plainly that these inspired officers should remain in the
Church of Christ "till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of
the knowledge of the Son of God." (Ephesians 4: 13). As that condition
has not yet been attained, there is still need of apostles and
prophets to bring mankind to the "unity of the faith." This desirable
state cannot be brought about without living apostles and prophets,
who are inspired of God. People are divided in their opinions about
the meaning of many things written by ancient apostles and prophets,
and they will not unite without receiving new revelation to enlighten
them. Some may be led to think prophets are no longer needed in the
Church because of the words of Paul:

    "Whether there be prophecies, they shall fail. . . For we know
    in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect
    is come, then that which is in part shall be done away." (I
    Corinthians 13: 8, 9, 10).

The time he speaks of, "when that which is perfect is come," has not
yet arrived. When it does come prophecies may fail or be "done away;"
but that time will be when "they {233} shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for
they shall know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them,
saith the Lord." (Jeremiah 31: 34; Hebrews 8: 11).

IS THE CANON OF SCRIPTURE FULL?

The following words of St. John are supposed by some to imply that no
more revelation is to be given:

    "For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the
    prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things,
    God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book.
    (Revelation 22: 18).

The apostle here only warns man against adding to the words of the
prophecy of his book. He says nothing about the Bible as a whole; nor
does he say that God will not add any more revelations to His word.

WITHOUT MODERN REVELATION BIBLE PROPHECIES CANNOT BE FULFILLED.

The Bible contains many predictions concerning marvelous events to take
place in latter days, just before or at the time of the second coming
of Christ.

The Gospel of the Kingdom is to be preached in all the world as a
witness to all nations. (Matthew 24: 14; Revelation 14: 6).

The Lord's elect is to be gathered from the uttermost parts of the
earth. (Mark 13: 27; Isaiah 11: 11, 12).

The house of the Lord is to be established in the top of the mountains.
(Isaiah 2: 2, 3; Micah 4: 1, 2).

The Lord is to set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, nor
left to other people. (Daniel 2: 44).

The gifts of the gospel as enjoyed in the days of Christ's former
apostles are to be restored. (Isaiah 35: 5, 6).

According to the ancient predictions, many other great things are to
take place in latter days. But how can they be accomplished unless
the Lord directs what is to be done by revealing "His secret unto His
servants the prophets," and by sending His messenger to "prepare the
way" before Him?

Sufficient proof has been given to show that apostles and prophets
should be in the Church of Christ, and that we should expect prophets
to be raised up by the Lord in these latter days.

{234}

TREATMENT OF PROPHETS IN PAST AGES.

The scriptures furnish abundant evidence to prove another peculiar fact
respecting the Lord's holy prophets. That is, they have always been
misunderstood, reviled, persecuted and spoken evil of. Jesus says to
His disciples,

    "Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
    and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my
    sake. . . . FOR SO PERSECUTED THEY THE PROPHETS WHICH WERE BEFORE
    YOU." (Matthew 5: 11, 12).

Our Savior Himself met with the same kind of treatment. He is spoken of
as a "stumbling stone and rock of offense."

JESUS A STUMBLING STONE.

The Gospel narrative as given by the four evangelists, shows very
clearly that He was indeed a stumbling stone to the Jewish nation. He
did mighty miracles before their eyes. They were in possession of the
prophecies concerning His coming and ministry; but He did not fulfill
their preconceived and erroneous ideas of what they expected of Him,
and so they refused to accept Him as their Redeemer.

MANY PROPHETS REJECTED.

The Prophet Noah was rejected by all in his day except his own family.
His message, no doubt, was regarded as a very strange and extraordinary
one. It was hard to accept. No such thing as a flood covering the
entire earth was known up to that time, and how could they accept his
warning only through simple faith?

When Moses, under the direction of the Lord, undertook to free the
Israelites from bondage in Egypt the people whom he was sent to deliver
murmured against him, notwithstanding the Lord performed such mighty
wonders in their behalf.

When Jeremiah and Ezekiel predicted the downfall of Jerusalem in
their day they were not believed. The historian Josephus says that
Zedekiah, the king, refused to believe the prophets because Jeremiah
foretold that he, the king, should be taken captive to Babylon, while
Ezekiel said he should not see Babylon. These two prophecies seemed to
disagree, so Zedekiah made this apparent disagreement an excuse for not
believing either of the two prophets. Yet they were both correct in
their utterances. The king was taken to Babylon, but he never saw the
city, for his eyes were put out before he arrived there.

{235}

PERSECUTION TO FOLLOW ALL INSPIRED TEACHERS.

The words of Jesus to His disciples about the prophets before them
being persecuted convey the idea that those who should follow would get
the same reception.

    "If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you." (John
    15: 20).

So says the Savior to His apostles; and so it was. They were persecuted
and put to death. It is reasonable to believe that other prophets might
be treated in a similar manner. If it is to be as in the days of Noah
at the time of the coming of the Son of man, then we may expect that
the great majority of mankind will reject the message of salvation
proclaimed to them by the prophets which the Lord will send.

CONCLUSIONS DRAWN FROM SCRIPTURES QUOTED.

The scriptures pointed out in the foregoing clearly show these facts:

1. THAT PROPHETS ARE SENT BY THE LORD TO ANNOUNCE ALL IMPORTANT EVENTS
CONNECTED WITH HIS PURPOSES.

2. THAT A PROPHET SHOULD BE RAISED UP IN LATTER DAYS TO PREPARE FOR
CHRIST'S SECOND COMING.

3. THAT APOSTLES AND PROPHETS ARE ALWAYS NECESSARY IN THE CHURCH OF
CHRIST.

4. THAT THE TRUE CHURCH IS BUILT UPON APOSTLES AND PROPHETS.

5. THAT THE CANON OF SCRIPTURE WAS NOT COMPLETED IN FORMER DAYS.

6. THAT WITHOUT NEW REVELATION THE BIBLE PROPHECIES CANNOT BE FULFILLED

7. THAT IN ALL PAST AGES PROPHETS HAVE BEEN PERSECUTED.

WAS JOSEPH SMITH A PROPHET?

TESTIMONY OF HIS WORKS.

The passages of scripture already given prove beyond question that a
prophet is to be raised up to prepare the way before the coming of the
Lord. If the Bible prophecies are to be fulfilled we are certainly
justified in believing that this should be the case.

So far as known only one man of the nineteenth century claimed to be
the inspired messenger sent to prepare the way {236} of the Lord. His
name was Joseph Smith. He was born on the 23rd day of December, 1805,
in Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, (U. S. A.)

JUDGING BY THE FRUITS.

Let us test the claims he made by the teachings of the scriptures, and
see if they are worthy of acceptance.

"Beware of false prophets," says the Savior; then He adds, "Ye shall
know them by their fruits. . . A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit." (Matthew 7:
15, 16, 18).

This test which the Savior gives is a good one to be guided by.

JOSEPH SMITH'S CLAIM.

Joseph Smith claimed that when between fourteen and fifteen years of
age, while praying for religious guidance, he had a vision in which he
saw both God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ. He described them as
two glorious personages in the form of man and exactly resembling each
other in features. They told him that all religious denominations at
that time were believing in incorrect doctrines, and that none of them
was acknowledged of God as His church and kingdom; and they promised
that the fullness of the Gospel should at some future time be made
known unto him.

HIS CLAIM COMPARED WITH SCRIPTURE.

There is nothing contrary to scripture in this claim. That God is a
personage in form like a man harmonizes with what the Bible says:

    "So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created
    he him; male and female created he them." (Genesis 1: 27).

That Jesus Christ was in feature like His Father is stated by St. Paul:

    "Being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his
    person." (Hebrews 1: 3).

That holy beings appear to men is also scriptural. The Savior appeared
to Paul. (Acts 22: 6-11). Cornelius saw in vision an angel of God.
(Acts 10: 1-6).

That the various churches of the day were believing incorrect doctrine
and were not acceptable unto the Lord, is also {237} apparent when
their teachings are compared with the doctrines of the Bible. [1]

PREDICTIONS THAT THE GOSPEL SHOULD BE RESTORED.

That the fullness of the Gospel should be restored to the earth in
latter days is predicted in the scriptures. When Jesus was asked by His
disciples what should be the sign of His second coming, and of the end
of the world, He replied

    "This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for
    a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." (Matthew
    24: 14).

The Apostle John in reference to events that should take place in
latter days, says:

    "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
    everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
    to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with
    a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his
    judgment is come." (Revelation 14: 6, 7).

The Prophet Daniel foretells that the kingdom of God shall be set up
"in the latter days." He says,

    "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
    kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not
    be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume
    all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." (Daniel 2: 44).

The Prophet Isaiah predicts that the Gospel blessings shall be enjoyed
in the last days, when the house of Israel is to be gathered. If the
miraculous blessings of the Gospel are restored then it will be evident
that the fullness of the Gospel will be also be restored. Isaiah says
concerning the time when "the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and
come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads:"

    "Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the
    deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart,
    and the tongue of the dumb sing." (Isaiah 35: 5, 6).

Speaking of what the Lord will do when Israel is gathered in the latter
days, Jeremiah records these the Lord's words:

    "I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed
    you with knowledge and understanding." (Jeremiah 3: 15).

If pastors according to the Lord's heart are to feed the people with
knowledge and understanding, they will surely reveal {238} to the
people the true Gospel of Christ. That these scriptural passages have
reference to the restoration of the fullness of the Gospel in latter
days will be made more plainly apparent as we proceed, and show their
actual fulfillment.

JOSEPH SMITH TREATED THE SAME AS ANCIENT PROPHETS.

As soon as Joseph Smith made known what he had seen in this vision,
he was ridiculed, reviled and persecuted. This persecution and
manifestation of hatred towards him continued throughout his life.
Being only fourteen years of age when it commenced it certainly could
not have been because of any wrong he had done. As with the Savior, he
was hated without a cause, and in fulfillment of the words of Jesus, he
was persecuted for righteousness' sake. This treatment given him is of
itself an outward proof that he was an inspired man.

ACCOUNT OF SOME OF HIS WORKS.

Some years later this young man received other visions and
instructions, an account of which is herewith given in his own language:

    "On the evening of the 21st of September, A. D., 1823, while I was
    praying unto God, and endeavoring to exercise faith in the precious
    promises of scripture, on a sudden, a light like that of day, only
    of a far purer and more glorious appearance arid brightness, burst
    into the room: indeed the first sight was as though the house was
    filled with consuming fire. The appearance produced a shock that
    affected the whole body. In a moment a personage stood before me
    surrounded with a glory yet greater than that with which I was
    already surrounded. This messenger proclaimed himself to be an
    angel of God sent to bring the joyful tidings that the covenant
    which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled,
    that the preparatory work for the second coming of the Messiah was
    speedily to commence; that the time was at hand for the gospel in
    all its fullness, to be preached in power unto all nations, that a
    people might be prepared for the millennial reign.

    "I was informed that I was chosen to be an instrument in the
    hands of God to bring about some of His purposes in this glorious
    dispensation.

    "I was also informed concerning the aboriginal inhabitants of
    this country, and shown who they were, and from whence they came;
    a brief sketch of their origin, progress, civilization, laws,
    governments, of their righteousness and iniquity, and the blessings
    of God being finally withdrawn from them as a people was made known
    unto me. I was also told where there were deposited some plates,
    on which were engraven an abridgment of the records of the ancient
    prophets that had existed on this continent. The angel appeared to
    me three times the same night, and unfolded the same things. After
    having received many visits from the angels of God, unfolding the
    majesty and glory of the events that should transpire in the {239}
    last days, on the morning of the 22nd of September, A. D., 1827,
    the angel of the Lord delivered the records into my hands.

    "These records were engraven on plates which had the appearance of
    gold. Each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long, and not
    quite as thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings,
    in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume, as the
    leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole.
    The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part
    of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were
    small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many
    marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art
    of engraving. With the records was found a curious instrument,
    which the ancients called 'Urim and Thummim,' which consisted
    of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a
    breastplate.

    "Through the medium of the 'Urim and Thummim' I translated the
    record, by the gift and power of God.

    "In this important and interesting book the history of ancient
    America is unfolded, from its first settlement by a colony that
    came from the tower of Babel at the confusion of languages, to
    the beginning of the fifth century of the Christian era. We are
    informed by these records that America in ancient times had been
    inhabited by two distinct races of people. The first were called
    Jaredites, and came directly from the tower of Babel. The second
    race came directly from the city of Jerusalem, about six hundred
    years before Christ. They were principally Israelites, of the
    descendants of Joseph. The Jaredites were destroyed about the time
    that the Israelites came from Jerusalem, who succeeded them in the
    inheritance of the country. The principal nation of the second race
    fell in battle towards the close of the fourth century. The remnant
    are the Indians that now inhabit this country. This book also
    tells us that our Savior made His appearance upon this continent
    after His resurrection, that He planted the gospel here in all its
    fullness, and richness, and power, and blessing; that they had
    apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers and evangelists; the same
    order, the same Priesthood, the same ordinances, gifts, powers and
    blessings as were enjoyed on the eastern continent; that the people
    were cut off in consequence of their transgressions; that the last
    of their prophets who existed among them was commanded to write an
    abridgment of their prophecies, history, etc., and to hide it up
    in the earth, and that it should come forth and be united with the
    Bible for the accomplishment of the purposes of God in the last
    days. For a more particular account I would refer to the Book of
    Mormon.

    "As soon as the news of this discovery was made known, false
    reports, mis-representations and slander flew, as on the wings of
    the wind, in every direction; the house was frequently beset by
    mobs and evil designing persons. Several times I was shot at, and
    very narrowly escaped, and every device was made use of to get the
    plates away from me, but the power and blessing of God attended me,
    and several began to believe my testimony.

    "On the 6th of April, 1830, the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints was organized in the town of Fayette, Seneca
    County, State of New York. Some few were called and ordained
    by the spirit of revelation and prophecy, and began to preach
    as the Spirit gave them utterance, and, though weak, they were
    strengthened by the power of God, and many were brought to
    repentance, were immersed in the water, and were filled with the
    Holy Ghost by the {240} laying on of hands. They saw visions and
    prophesied, devils were cast out, and the sick healed by the laying
    on of hands."

BIBLE PROPHECIES FULFILLED.

The statements in the foregoing quotation are all in harmony with Bible
prophecies.

First.--That an angel should come in latter days to restore the
everlasting Gospel to the earth is foretold in the passage already
quoted from the writings of St. John. (Revelation 14: 6, 7).

Second.--That a preparatory work should be done before the second
coming of the Messiah is evident from the Savior's words. (Matthew 24:
14, 31).

Third.--That a chosen messenger should be sent of the Lord to prepare
His way before His second coming is predicted by an ancient prophet.
(Malachi 3: 1).

Fourth.--That a favored people of the Lord, aside from the Jews, dwelt
upon the earth in the days of the Savior, is to be inferred from the
Bible. The Savior said to His disciples:

    "Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must
    bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold,
    and one shepherd." (John 10: 16).

It is believed by some that the "other sheep" Christ mentioned were
the Gentiles that accepted the Gospel through the teachings of His
Apostles. This cannot be His meaning, for He had no "other sheep" among
the Gentiles, for none of them, of which there is any record, believed
at that time. He also said: "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of
the house of Israel" (Matthew 15: 24). There is no account of Him going
to visit the heathen, or of the latter hearing His voice.

The remarkable volume known as the Book of Mormon gives an account of
the Savior's visit to the "other sheep" which He declared should hear
His voice.

Fifth.--That the record of this chosen people of the western world
shall be joined with that of the Jews, is alluded to by Ezekiel in the
following language:

    "Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it,
    For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take
    another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim,
    and for all the house of Israel His companions: And join them one
    to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.
    And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying,
    Wilt thou not show us what thou meanest by these? Say {241} unto
    them, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will take the stick of
    Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel
    his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of
    Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.
    And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before
    their eyes. (Ezekiel 37: 16-20).

In ancient times writings were rolled upon sticks and a record received
the name "stick." The Bible is a record of the Jews, or Judah and his
companions, while the Book of Mormon is a record of the descendants of
Joseph. Since the latter book has been brought to light the two have
practically become one in the hands of the Lord. Proofs that the Book
of Mormon is authentic and divine will be given in another chapter.

Sixth.--The sacred instruments called the Urim and Thummim, which
Joseph Smith says he used in the translation of the ancient writings,
are named in the scriptures. (Exodus 28: 30). That they were used for
the purpose of getting information from a divine source is also evident
from the Bible. (Numbers 27: 21; I Samuel 28: 6). The scriptures
mention them as being connected with a breastplate. (Leviticus 8: 8).

CHURCH ORGANIZATION THE SAME AS FORMERLY.

Seventh.--The character of the church which the Lord commanded Joseph
Smith to organize is strictly in harmony with the church of Christ of
former days. It was established by revelation from God, as Jesus said
He would build His church when He declared to Peter,

    "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not
    revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I say
    unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
    church." (Matthew 16: 17, 18).

"This rock," mentioned in the above quotation refers to the principle
of revelation by which Peter knew Jesus was the Son of God.

Further in harmony with the description of the church of Christ as
contained in the Bible this latter-day church was "built upon the
foundation of the apostles and prophets," with Jesus Christ as the
"chief corner stone," (Ephesians 2: 20): for the Lord revealed anew
to Joseph Smith that there should be "first apostles, secondarily
prophets," etc., as described by Paul (1 Corinthians 12: 28). Besides
this, as Joseph Smith testifies, those who were called to assist him
in the ministry {242} were "called and ordained by the spirit of
revelation and prophecy," as men were anciently. (Acts 13: 1-3; 14: 23;
Hebrews 5: 4).

SAME DOCTRINES AS IN FORMER DAYS.

Those who believed in the Gospel as taught by this latter-day prophet,
were called upon to repent of their sins, then they were immersed in
the water, or baptized, and "were filled with the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of hands." Those who complied with the requirements which
Joseph Smith said were necessary in order to enter into the Church of
Christ, received the Holy Ghost under his administration. This fact is
indisputable evidence that he was authorized of God. It also shows that
his teachings were just the same as those of the former apostles, for
they taught the same order of principles of initiation into the church
of Christ. (Acts 2: 38; Hebrews 6: 1, 2).

THE HOLY GHOST RECEIVED.

It may be asked, what proof can be given that those who obey the
ordinances of the Gospel as taught by Joseph Smith receive the Holy
Ghost. In answer it can be said that they enjoy the promised blessings
or fruits of the Spirit. They receive a knowledge that the doctrine is
of God, as promised by the Savior.

    "Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his
    that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
    doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself."
    (John 7: 16, 17).

St Paul says,

    "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
    gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Galatians 5:
    22, 23).

All these blessings they also partake of.

HOW TO OBTAIN PROOF.

Anyone who desires to be assured that these blessings are enjoyed as
claimed can satisfy himself by obeying the same doctrines in humility,
and receiving the same blessings; for as the Apostle Peter declared,

    "The promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are
    afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2:
    39).

{243}

No stronger proof of the fact can be received than that of actual
experience. This evidence is within reach of all that are sincere in
their inquiries and desirous of learning the truth.

OUTWARD PROOFS.

As outward proof that the Holy Ghost is received by those who obey the
ordinances of the Gospel as advocated by Joseph Smith and by the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, they enjoy the spiritual gifts
promised to the believers.

As Joseph Smith states, after the Church was organized its members "saw
visions and prophesied, devils were cast out, and the sick healed by
the laying on of hands." These gifts were promised by Christ as signs
following the believers, (Mark 16: 17, 18); and St. Paul says they were
in the church in the days of the apostles. (I Corinthians 12).

As evidence that the miraculous gifts of the Gospel are in the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the following testimonies given
by persons who have recently witnessed or experienced the gifts are
inserted. They are only a few among the many hundreds that might be
offered if space would allow.

TESTIMONY OF WITNESSES.

The following letter was addressed to the editor of the _Millennial
Star_, a Latter-day Saint magazine, published at 42 Islington,
Liverpool, England:

    "With pleasure I write to inform you that through the
    administration of Elders C. Measom and G. II. Meadows, on Sunday,
    March 7, 1897, and by the power of God after being confined to
    my bed for two years suffering greatly with pains in my head,
    etc., I was enabled to get up and walk into the next room, where
    I partook of refreshments and sat up for six hours. I have been
    free from pain since the pain left me, which was before their hands
    were removed from my head. I am fifty-one years of age, and have
    been brought up in the Church of England. Since the Elders named
    came to labor in this district, I have had frequent conversations
    with them, which, with the loan of books, has enabled me to have
    faith to believe that God would use them as His instruments for
    my recovery. I am not a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of
    Latter-day Saints, but hope to be so shortly.

    Yours respectfully,

    "Mrs. E. Bond."

    _Castle Hill, Warwick, March 9, 1897_.

The subjoined article is a testimony from outside the Church, impartial
and unimpeachable. It appears in the Zanesville, O., _Daily Signal_ of
December 20th, 1897, under the caption "A Modern Miracle."

    {244} "Mr. Matthew Gray of the seventh ward is perhaps the happiest
    person in Zanesville to-day; so he seemed, at least, when seen at
    his pleasant Abington Avenue home by a _Signal_ representative at
    an early hour this morning.

    "And, too, there is nothing strange or remarkable about Mr. Gray's
    happiness, though it was the result of one of the strangest and
    most remarkable faith tests ever enacted in this city; and the
    story of Mr. Gray's miraculous cure of a relentless affliction will
    be read with much interest.

    "In October, three years ago, Matthew Gray was stricken with
    paralysis, the terrible disease affecting his entire left side.
    For a year to the month Mr. Gray was able to walk with the help of
    crutches, but during the following October, two years ago, he was
    the recipient of a second stroke of paralysis, and from that time
    until yesterday Mr. Gray had been deprived of all use of his left
    side, the entire left portion of his body being apparently dead,
    his left arm being limp and palsied at his side and his left foot
    and leg were in the same inanimate condition.

    "Such, in brief, has been Matthew Gray's condition for more
    than three years, and two years of that time he has either sat
    helplessly in his large arm chair or has lain in bed seemingly
    waiting for the death angel to relieve him of his suffering.

    "Last Thursday two visitors, peculiarly clad, knocked at the
    Gray homestead and were granted admission to the afflicted man's
    chamber. These visitors were two Mormon Elders who have been in
    Zanesville for the past few weeks, and whose mission to the Clay
    city has been regarded with only passing interest. . . . .

    "Now for the interesting part of the story, related to a _Signal_
    reporter by Mr. Gray himself, and given as near as possible in his
    own words:

    "'Last Friday four Mormon Elders called at my home here. They were
    very genteel in appearance and actions and asked me if I wouldn't
    like to look over some of their tracts, etc., and also asked me
    if I would not let them cure me by faith. I consented and they
    impressed upon me very strongly that I should not have faith in
    them but should place all my faith in God as it was through Him and
    not them that my cure would be accomplished. This liberal statement
    on their part and their own sincerity aided me materially, for I
    always knew that God alone could cure me, and, do you know, I have
    always thought that God would cure me.

    "'As I said before, I consented and they set Sunday afternoon at
    2 o'clock for the time of holding the meeting, and additionally
    stated that from then, Friday morning, until after the faith
    meeting they would not eat anything, as a period of fasting seemed
    necessary.

    "'Sunday afternoon, or yesterday afternoon, at 2 o'clock the four
    Elders came here to my home and after repeatedly instructing me to
    put my faith in God they knelt at my bedside in prayer, my wife
    being the sixth occupant of the room.

    "'Following this first prayer, and while I was sitting here in my
    big arm chair, one of the Elders liberally anointed my head with
    oil--sacred oil--and after that was done they formed a circle
    around my chair, each one placing his right hand on my head and
    all placed their left hands on each other's shoulders. I had
    perfect faith in all that they were doing, and, while each of
    the four Elders earnestly {245} prayed, I, too, bent my head in
    reverence and appealed with all the faith at my command to God for
    deliverance from my affliction.

    "'Finally they concluded and one of the Elders commanded me to
    walk. All at once I became possessed of an almost superhuman desire
    to get up and walk, and when I tried to, after my muscles quivered
    for a brief instant, I raised my left arm and then stood up. I took
    a step and found I could move my left leg. I took another step and
    walked out into the kitchen and back. After awhile I made the round
    trip to the kitchen again and while on the third trip, my left
    ankle turned slightly and I sat down.

    "'While I am profusely thankful to the four Elders for the interest
    that they manifested in my case, I want it distinctly understood
    that I look to God as my deliverer and not to them.'

    "When seen by the _Signal_ representative this morning, Mr. Gray
    was sitting in his big arm chair with his left foot in a bucket
    of hot water--a household remedy for sprains. To illustrate the
    extent of his cure the happy gentleman shook hands with the writer,
    using first his right hand and next his left hand, and the latter
    member, which for three years had remained dead almost at his
    side, contained a strong and hearty grip. Many times he raised his
    left arm above his head and waved it to and fro to illustrate the
    positive use he had of the member, and while relating the above
    experience he gesticulated as freely with his left arm as with the
    right. Many times he lifted the left foot from the water without
    any apparent effort and accompanied the pleasant movement with a
    smile almost glorious in its extent and meaning.

    "Matthew Gray is a well-known citizen of Zanesville. He was born
    and raised in Muskingham County and he and his good wife have
    reared a family of ten children, all but one of whom reside in the
    county."

Edward F. Turley, one of the Latter-day Saint Elders who administered
to Mr. Gray, relates the circumstances of the remarkable healing in
a letter to the _Deseret News_, written from Zanesville, Ohio, on
December 20, 1897. His version is as follows:

    "Last Thursday while out tracting I met a lady very much opposed to
    us. Among other things, she said: 'If you people have power to heal
    the sick as you claim, why don't you heal this man next door, who
    has been an invalid for twenty-nine months. He hasn't been on his
    feet for that length of time.' I said to the person that the signs
    followed the believers to-day as much as anciently.

    "I called on this gentleman, Matthew Gray, who has been an invalid
    for twenty-nine months. I asked him if he had faith enough to
    believe that he could be healed by the power of God. 'Yes,' said
    he. I told him we would be there on Sunday at 2 p.m. We called
    according to appointment. Less than three minutes after the
    administration he commenced shaking. His whole frame shook. He
    commenced rising up in his chair. His wife then threw her arms
    around him and they both shouted: 'Bless the Lord. The Savior has
    come! I know these are the servants of the Lord.' Father, mother
    and a grown daughter were so overjoyed that they wept. The man
    walked into the kitchen three times. For twenty-nine months his
    entire left {246} side had been paralyzed. The three persons bore
    testimony that this was the first time their father had walked for
    twenty-nine months."

The _Deseret News_, a paper issued in Salt Lake City, Utah, of February
24, 1898, publishes a letter, written by a United States soldier
stationed at Fort Huachuca, Arizona. The writer's name is Arthur M.
Swigart. His letter is dated February 9, 1898, and reads as follows:

    "While living in Denver I had the fortune to become acquainted with
    some of the Saints there. After being thoroughly convinced of the
    authenticity of the Gospel as taught by them, I made application
    for baptism, but before the day appointed for this ordinance to
    take place I threw my left knee out of joint and fractured my knee
    cap. I was a soldier at the time and was taken to the government
    hospital, where I spent nine weeks, and was pronounced a cripple
    for life by Major Munn, surgeon U.S.A. On the second day of July,
    1897, I was baptized by Elder H. S. Ensign, and when I came up from
    the water I was a sound man; and on December 16, 1897, I stood the
    examination at the recruiting office at Evansville, Indiana, and am
    again in the service of the United States.

    "If you deem my testimony worthy of publication and think by it
    some may be led to investigate the truths of our precious Gospel,
    please publish it."

Below is an extract from a letter written by Henry Coulam, a Latter-day
Saint missionary who was at the time of writing (December 1, 1896), in
Bradford, Yorkshire, England:

    "While laboring in Keighly last winter, and going with tracts from
    house to house, I came to a lady standing outside by the door. She
    asked me if I had something good. I answered, Yes, at the same time
    giving her a tract entitled 'The Only Way to be Saved.' I then
    commenced to talk to her about the Gospel, and of its restoration
    with its gifts and blessings. She invited me into the house, where
    I found her two daughters, one of whom, a young lady of about
    seventeen years, was lying in bed, and had been home from her work
    two weeks.

    "The mother said to me, 'Mr., I want you to lay hands on my girl: I
    do not want to lose her.'

    "I told her that the signs were for those who believed, and
    explained more fully to her the Gospel and its blessings for those
    who lived up to its blessings.

    "She replied, 'Mr., I know you have the authority and if you will
    administer to my daughter, she will get better.'

    "After talking further to her and seeing that she was sincere, I
    turned to the daughter and asked her if she had faith and wished me
    to administer to her.

    "'Yes,' she answered.

    "I went back to my lodgings, got a bottle of consecrated oil and
    returned to the house. The mother and I knelt down by the bed and
    I offered a short prayer, after which I anointed the daughter with
    oil, and rebuked the disease.

    {247} "In four days from that time, the young lady went to her
    work, and has continued to do so."

Elder C. L. Galbraith, another Latter-day Saint missionary, writing
from South Shields, June 3, 1897, relates a case of healing by the
power of the Lord:

    "Not long since I was in Sunderland attending our meetings which we
    hold every Sunday afternoon and evening. After the first meeting
    I walked to Ryhope, where I partook of a meal with a friend. On
    my return in company with some members of the Church we passed by
    an aged sister's home. After we had passed the house I said to
    those with me, 'I feel like I should have called in to see Sister
    Chalder, but we have not time.'

    "We continued on some distance when I again felt impressed more
    strongly than before to return. I turned to the brethren who were
    with me and said, 'We must go back.'

    "We turned and did so. On entering we found Sister Chalder lying in
    bed and very sick indeed; in fact those present thought her time
    had come, as she is far past the appointed lease of life. When she
    recognized us her countenance brightened and she endeavored to
    speak to us. Her voice was very weak, and we had to draw near to
    her in order to distinguish what she said.

    "'I am so glad you have come!' she repeated, 'I have been praying
    to God that you might come, that I might be healed.'

    "Those present with the old lady did not believe as we do. The
    gentleman, whose name was Woodruff, said, 'I do not believe in the
    ordinance of laying on hands for the healing of the sick.'

    "I told him to remain and see whether God would not keep His
    promise wherein He said by the mouth of His Apostle James: 'Is any
    sick among you? let him call for the elders of the Church; and let
    them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord:
    and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
    raise him up.' (James 5: 14, 15).

    "After the ordinance Sister Chalder raised up and said she was
    better.

    "Mr. Woodruff said, 'This is my first time to see anything like
    that.'

    "He was as white as a corpse. To-day he is a living testimony that
    she was healed. So did all present say they knew it was the power
    of God made manifest."

Thousands of other miracles have been witnessed by those who have
obeyed the Gospel. The blind have received their sight, the dumb have
been made to speak, the deaf have had their hearing restored, and the
sick have been healed of all manner of diseases. In short, all the
promises made by the Savior to the believers have been realized by the
Latter-day Saints as fully as they were by the former-day Saints. To
these facts there are thousands of living witnesses to-day. Many of
those who have witnessed these manifestations of God's goodness, and
many others who have received them, {248} have had their testimonies
published to the world, and there are many such testimonies on record
in the printed literature of the Church.

ANCIENT PROPHECIES BEING FULFILLED.

Some five months after the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints the Prophet Joseph Smith received a revelation
from the Lord which among other things declared:

    "And ye are called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect,
    for mine elect hear my voice and harden not their hearts; wherefore
    the decree hath gone forth from the Father, that they shall be
    gathered in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare
    their hearts and be prepared in all things against the day when
    tribulation and desolation are sent forth upon the wicked; for the
    hour is nigh, and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe: and
    all the proud, and they that do wickedly, shall be as stubble, and
    I will burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that wickedness shall
    not be upon the earth."

THE GATHERING OF ISRAEL.

The gathering of Israel in the last days is predicted by many of the
ancient prophets. Jeremiah records these words of the Lord:

    "I will take you one of a city and two of a family, and I will
    bring you to Zion: and I will give you pastors according to mine
    heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding."
    (Jeremiah 3: 14, 15).

    "And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries
    whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their
    folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase." (Jeremiah 23: 3).

Other prophets make similar predictions. The Savior said to His
disciples that His elect should be gathered together "from the four
winds, from one end of the heaven to the other." St. John says:

    "And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my
    people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
    not of her plagues." (Revelation 18: 4).

The evidence that this revelation Joseph Smith claimed to have received
is genuine is in the fact that the elect are being gathered. Ever since
the revelation was made known the Latter-day Saints have been gathering
to a designated place.

True to the prediction of Jeremiah, those who accept the Gospel and
gather to Zion are very frequently "one of a city, and two of a
family." The further fulfillment of the same {249} prophecy, they are
being fed "with knowledge and understanding." The Latter-day Saints are
taught to understand the Gospel for themselves, so that they do not
need to depend upon others, and each one is thereby fitted to teach
its principles. The way is also pointed out to them whereby they can
receive a knowledge from heaven of the truth of the doctrines they are
taught, so that they are not deluded nor misled by the teachings of
men. The pastors who feed them with this "knowledge and understanding"
are according to the Lord's heart, in this much at least: they labor to
save mankind through the love they have for them. They do not "teach
for hire," nor "divine for money." Their services are given freely, and
the Gospel is taught by them without money and without price.

The gathering of the Lord's people "one of a city, and two of a
family," brings about many conditions which the Savior said would be
the result of the preaching of His gospel; and in numerous cases the
Latter-day Saints realize in their own experiences, the fulfillment of
such words as the following spoken by the Savior:

    "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to
    send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance
    against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
    daughter in law against her mother in law. And a man's foes shall
    be they of his own household." (Matthew 10: 34, 36).

    "And ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and
    kinsfolks, and friends." (Luke 21: 16).

The Latter-day Saints are not of the world in their ways. They are
taught to strictly abstain from the sinful practices in the world, and
are therefore looked upon as a peculiar people. As the Savior said
would be the case, because they are not of the world, the world hate
them, and often persecute them. They rejoice, however, in the promise
of Jesus, which they find to be true:

    "There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
    father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for my sake, and
    the gospel's, but he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time,
    houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and
    lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life."
    (Mark 10: 29, 30).

GATHERING PECULIAR TO LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

It is a significant fact that there are no other people than the
Latter-day Saints who make any profession that they have been commanded
of the Lord to gather, nor are there any {250} others who are making
any efforts with such an object in view.

There is something remarkable about this gathering. When people accept
the Prophet's teachings they get the spirit of gathering, and they
have to be restrained from going in too great haste. While a love for
kindred and for native country is natural to the human heart, those who
receive the truth of this newly revealed Gospel, become filled with the
desire to leave all and gather with the Saints. This is a strong proof
that the Lord is working upon the hearts of mankind to bring about the
fulfillment of His words through the ancient prophets; and it proclaims
the divine calling of Joseph Smith.

The Latter-day Saints also believe that the Jews will eventually be
gathered to Jerusalem, as has been predicted in past ages. The Prophet
Joseph Smith taught this, and took steps toward the accomplishment of
that great event.

EVENTS IN THE HISTORY OF THE SAINTS.

After being driven from their homes several times, and enduring all
manner of persecution for the sake of their religion, the Latter-day
Saints were finally compelled to leave the confines of civilization and
seek a home in the unknown wilderness of the western part of America.
By divine guidance they were led to the valleys of the Rocky Mountains.
Without any knowledge of the country they planted themselves in the
valley of the Great Salt Lake in what is now known as the State of
Utah. Here in a desolate waste they determined to make their home,
notwithstanding the fact that adventurers who were better acquainted
with the country, declared that no civilized men could live there.

WORDS OF THE PSALMIST FULFILLED.

The journey of the Latter-day Saints to this their new home, as well as
many other events of their experience, appear to be a fulfillment of
ancient prophecy. The Psalmist says:

    "O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy
    endureth for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he
    hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy; and gathered them out
    of the lands, from the east, and from the west, from the north,
    and from the south. They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary
    way; they found no city to dwell in. Hungry and thirsty, their
    soul fainted in them. Then they cried unto the Lord in their
    trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses. And he
    led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of
    habitation." (Psalm 107).

{251} The Latter-day Saints are the only religious body that has been
gathered out "from the east, and from the west, and from the north,
and from the south." As before stated they are the only people who
advocate the doctrine of gathering. When driven, by persecution, from
their homes in Nauvoo, Illinois, they were "redeemed from the hand of
the enemy," they "wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way," and
they "found no city to dwell in." They experienced hunger and thirst,
and "their soul fainted in them." The Lord "led them forth by the right
way," for they knew nothing themselves of the place to which they were
being led.

Eventually they came to a place designated by the prophet of the Lord
as the spot on which to build "a city of habitation." There they
established themselves, and through the marvelous blessings of the
Lord, the wilderness has been redeemed and the desert made to "blossom
as the rose."

ISAIAH'S PREDICTION FULFILLED. Two of the ancient prophets make
this prediction:

    "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
    the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains,
    and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow
    unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go
    up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob;
    and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths:
    for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord
    from Jerusalem." (Isaiah 2: 2, 3; Micah 4: 1, 2).

The state of Utah, and the surrounding country occupied by the
Latter-day Saints is situated on what is called the "back bone of the
American Continent," in the "tops of the mountains." In Salt Lake City,
the headquarters of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
there stands a temple erected and dedicated to the name of the Lord.
In three other cities of Utah are similar buildings, all of which are
raised to the name of the Most High, by the Latter-day Saints; and by
the way, they are the only temples in the world dedicated to the Lord,
and in which the holy ordinances pertaining to His house are performed.

The mountain on which the temple built by the Latter-day Saints stands
is established "in the top of the mountains," "exalted above the
hills," and people from all nations are flowing unto it as they are
being gathered out "from the four winds, from one end of heaven to
the other." "Many people," as the prophet predicted, go and say "Come
ye, and let us go {252} up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob," and they are being taught His ways, by men who
understand them through the revelations received from Him: for they
believe in present revelation, and enjoy that gift among the others of
the true Gospel of Christ.

It may be contended that this and the other prophecies concerning the
gathering of Israel refer to the gathering of the Jews to Jerusalem. It
is true that there are predictions that the Jews shall be gathered to
Jerusalem, but throughout the scripture prophecies there are two places
of gathering mentioned--Zion and Jerusalem. Both places are mentioned
in the quotation given above. The prophet also says: "O Zion, that
bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain." There are
no high mountains in Jerusalem. The top of the highest mountain peak in
all of Palestine is 331 feet below the valley of the Great Salt Lake,
in which Salt Lake City is situated.

A PROPHECY OF MALACHI.

The following prediction is one made by an ancient prophet:

    "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of
    the great and dreadful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart
    of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to
    their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse."
    (Malachi 4: 5, 6).

The Prophet Joseph Smith testifies that this was fulfilled on the third
day of April, 1836. At that time the body of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints was situated in Kirtland, Ohio, where they had
erected a temple to the Lord. It was in this temple that the vision
was received by Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, in which the Prophet
Elijah appeared unto them. They describe his appearance and message as
follows:

    "After this vision had closed, another great and glorious vision
    burst upon us, for Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven
    without tasting death, stood before us, and said--Behold, the
    time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi,
    testifying that he (Elijah) should be sent before the great and
    dreadful day of the Lord come. To turn the hearts of the fathers to
    the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth
    be smitten with a curse. Therefore the keys of this dispensation
    are committed into your hands, and by this ye may know that the
    great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors."

{253}

SALVATION FOR THE DEAD.

Through the Prophet Joseph Smith was revealed the doctrine of salvation
for the dead, a doctrine that had not been understood in the world for
many centuries until he taught it. It is nevertheless a scriptural
doctrine, and is referred to by Peter:

    "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the
    unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in
    the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went
    and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were
    disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days
    of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight
    souls were saved by water." (I Peter 3: 18-20).

It is also referred to by Paul:

    "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the
    dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?" (I
    Corinthians 15: 29).

Preaching the Gospel to the dead is referred to in several places in
the scriptures. (John 5: 25, 28; I Peter 4: 6).

That one person can perform a Gospel ordinance for and in behalf of
another accords with the teachings of the scriptures. Christ did
vicarious work for all mankind when He atoned for the sins of the
world. By that atonement He brought about the resurrection from the
grave, and made man's eternal salvation possible, as declared by the
Apostle Paul:

    "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (I
    Corinthians 15: 22).

Also in these words:

    "Being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto
    all them that obey him." (Hebrews 5: 9).

It is evident from the teachings of the Savior that there is a
necessity for such a provision in the plan of redemption. Christ
emphatically declared that a man cannot enter the kingdom of heaven
without baptism. He said to Nicodemus,

    "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
    into the kingdom of God." (John 3: 5).

In sending His disciples to teach all nations, He commanded them to
baptize those who believed. Many good people have died without baptism,
not having had the privilege of being baptized in this life; as they
cannot themselves attend to that ordinance after death, there is a
way provided for them {254} to receive admission into the kingdom of
heaven. The Savior has declared, they cannot do so without baptism;
therefore someone else must attend to that ordinance for them. Those
who die without the privilege of receiving the Gospel will have an
opportunity to hear and accept it in the spirit world, and the outward
ordinances necessary to salvation can be attended to in their behalf by
living persons.

Since this doctrine has been revealed, the hearts of the children have
been turned to their fathers, for many thousands of those who have
accepted the doctrine have manifested their solicitude for the welfare
of their dead ancestors by having the necessary ordinances performed
for them in the temples which the Latter-day Saints have built for that
purpose.

FACTS PROVEN.

It has been shown in the foregoing--

That the Claims made by Joseph Smith are in Harmony with the Holy
Scriptures.

That the Doctrines He Taught are the same as those of the Savior and
His Disciples.

That a Number of Ancient Predictions have been Fulfilled Through his
Ministry.

That the Lord's work begun by the Ministry of Joseph Smith is Destined
to bring about the Fulfillment of all the inspired prophecies
concerning the Latter Days.

That the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Possesses the same
Characteristics as that of Former Days.



JOSEPH SMITH'S WORKS.

EVIDENCE OF HIS INSPIRATION.

SCRIPTURAL TESTS.

The Bible tells how true and false prophets may be known:

    "The prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the
    prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that
    the Lord hath truly sent him." (Jeremiah 28: 9).

    {255} "When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if
    the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing
    which the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
    presumptuously: thou shall not be afraid of him." (Deuteronomy 18:
    22).

If a man prophesies and his prophecy is fulfilled, he is to be regarded
as a true prophet. If he prophesies and his predictions are not
fulfilled, he should be counted as a false prophet. Let us apply this
scriptural test to the words of Joseph Smith.

PREDICTION OF THE ANGEL.

The prophecy which he records as having been made by the first angel
who visited him: that his name should be had "for good and evil among
all nations, kindreds and tongues; or that it should be both good and
evil spoken of among all people," is a proof of inspiration. That
prediction has been fulfilled. Among all people who have heard his
teachings there have been some who have accepted them and have spoken
good about his name, while those who have rejected his message have
invariably spoken evil of him. Not being satisfied to leave him alone,
they have maliciously defamed his character and denounced him.

NONE CAN STOP GOD's WORK.

In a revelation given to the Prophet at an early day, the Lord said,

    "And the voice of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths
    of my disciples, whom I have chosen in these last days. AND THEY
    SHALL GO FORTH AND NONE SHALL STAY THEM, for I the Lord have
    commanded them."

At a later date the Prophet wrote these words:

    "No unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing. Persecution
    may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may
    defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly and independently
    till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept
    every nation and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God
    shall be accomplished and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is
    done."

In nearly every country to which they have gone, vigorous efforts
have been made from time to time to stop the Latter-day Saints from
preaching the Gospel, but true to the Lord's promises these attempts to
hinder His work have failed in every instance, and His work still goes
on.

{256}

"A MARVELOUS WORK."

In the very first revelations given by the Lord through Joseph Smith,
even before the Church was organized, it was declared that "a marvelous
work is about to come forth among the children of men." There are
hundreds of thousands of people who have associated themselves with
that work who can testify that it is most marvelous in its character.
Aside from these people there are many of the most intelligent men
of the century who have declared in their public utterances and have
placed themselves on record by their writings that there is something
very wonderful about the work established through Joseph Smith.

TESTIMONY OF DISINTERESTED MEN.

Mr. Josiah Quincy, an eminent American scholar, in his interesting
work entitled "Figures of the Past," gives his estimation of the great
prophet in these words:

    "It is by no means improbable that some future text-book, for the
    use of generations yet unborn, will contain a question something
    like this: What historical American of the nineteenth century has
    exerted the most powerful influence upon the destinies of his
    countrymen? And it is by no means impossible that the answer to
    that interrogatory may be thus written: JOSEPH SMITH, THE MORMON
    PROPHET. And the reply, absurd as it doubtless seems to most men
    now living, may be an obvious commonplace to their descendants.
    History deals in surprises and paradoxes quite as startling as
    this. The man who established a religion in this age of free
    debate, who was and is to-day accepted by hundreds of thousands
    as a direct emissary from the Most High--such a rare human being
    is not to be disposed of by pelting his memory with unsavory
    epithets. . . The most vital questions Americans are asking
    each other to-day have to do with this man and what he has left
    us. . . . Burning questions they are, which must give a prominent
    place in the history of the country to that sturdy self-asserter
    whom I visited at Nauvoo. Joseph Smith, claiming to be an inspired
    teacher, faced adversity such as few men have been called to meet,
    enjoyed a brief season of prosperity such as few men have ever
    attained, and finally, forty-three days after I saw him, went
    cheerfully to a martyr's death."

Hon. John A. Cockerill, a United States Senator, in an article
published in the _Cosmopolitan_, a New York magazine, says, in
reference to Utah, and its people, and their leader Brigham Young:

    "Thus, within the short space of half a century, a great State has
    sprung up in the land, as it were, before our eyes. _Its fame, with
    that of its founder, has become world-wide_. . . It is seldom given
    to the founder of a state that the body which he has organized
    {257} shall grow to such marvelous completeness and maturity within
    fifty years."

PROPHECY ABOUT WAR.

The following revelation was given to Joseph Smith on the 25th of
December, 1832:

    "'Verily, thus saith the Lord, concerning the wars that will
    shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina,
    which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many
    souls.

    "The days will come that war will be poured out upon all nations,
    beginning at that place;

    "For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the
    Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other
    nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and
    they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend
    themselves against other nations; and thus war shall be poured out
    upon all nations."

FULFILLED TWENTY-EIGHT YEARS AFTERWARDS.

The great civil war between the southern and northern States of America
was a literal fulfillment of the prophetic utterance, so far as it
referred to the first conflict. That war began with the bombardment of
Fort Sumter in the harbor of Charleston, South Carolina, on the 12th
day of April, 1861, over twenty-eight years after the prediction was
made, and it terminated in the "death and misery of many souls," for
the loss of life it caused is estimated at fully 1,000,000 men. History
shows that the Southern States did call upon Great Britain and other
nations for assistance, as predicted by the Prophet.

PREDICTED MEN'S LIVES WOULD BE SPARED.

In November, 1838, Joseph Smith and several of his brethren were tried
by a court-martial of their enemies, and were condemned to be shot in
the presence of their families and friends. To all human appearances
there was no hope for them to be spared alive. They were prisoners in
the hands of an infuriated mob; their death sentence had been passed,
the hour of execution set, and preparations for carrying out the
sentence were being made. With this terrible fate impending the Prophet
told his fellow-prisoners to be of good cheer, as the Lord had made it
known to him that not one of them should die. The mob disagreed among
themselves as to how the execution should be proceeded with, and the
falsely condemned men, after a lengthy imprisonment, regained their
liberty. Thus were the Prophet's words verified.

{258}

THE SAINTS' EXODUS FORETOLD.

On August 6, 1842, when the Latter-day Saints were situated in
Illinois, their great leader wrote in reference to a previous utterance
of his:

    "I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much
    affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would
    apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors, or
    lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some
    of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build
    cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of
    the Rocky Mountains."

Every statement in the foregoing prediction was subsequently fulfilled.
Mobs continued to afflict the Saints until they were forced to abandon
their homes. Many apostatized, and others were put to death by their
persecutors, or lost their lives in consequence of exposure. The
Prophet himself, with his brother Hyrum, was martyred less than two
years after the prophecy was uttered; and his own martyrdom was a
fulfillment of a prophecy he made. When, to save a massacre of the
Saints he delivered himself up to the pretended requirements of the
law, being promised protection by the governor of the State, he said:

    "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a
    summer's morning; I have a conscience void of offense towards God,
    and towards all men. I shall die innocent and it shall yet be said
    of me--he was murdered in cold blood."

This prediction concerning his own death is all the more remarkable
from the fact that he had been arrested upon false charges many times
before this. But, being entirely innocent, it was impossible to convict
him of any crime. The premonition he had when he surrendered to the
demands of the Governor of Illinois, when he said "I am going like a
lamb to the slaughter," was the unerring inspiration of God, which had
ever been his guide through life.

The country the Prophet referred to as the "Rocky Mountains" was but
little known at the time he spoke of it; and the Indian traders, and
"trappers" who were familiar with the country said nothing could be
raised there, and it was totally unfit for the establishment of a
community of people. Five years after the prophecy was made many of
the Saints were settled in the Rocky Mountains, and they and their
descendants are becoming a "mighty people" in the midst thereof.

{259}

GATHERING PREDICTED.

On the 11th of September, 1831, the Lord said through Joseph Smith,

    "For behold, I say unto you that Zion shall flourish, and the glory
    of the Lord shall be upon her, and she shall be an ensign unto the
    people, AND THERE SHALL COME UNTO HER OUT OF EVERY NATION UNDER
    HEAVEN."

In 1831, when the above words were uttered, the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints was composed of people who were converted in the
neighborhood where the Prophet and other leading men operated--only
a small portion of the United States. Since then the work has spread
throughout the world, and there are now gathered with the Saints people
from nearly every nation under heaven.

JOSEPH SMITH AS AN EXPOUNDER OF SCRIPTURE.

The manner in which he expounded the scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments, and in which he harmonized passages that were apparently
contradictory, and made every Bible doctrine so plain to the
understanding, is strong proof that he was inspired of Heaven. No
theologian of recent times has been able to do this as has been done by
Joseph Smith, although many learned men have made the attempt.

CHURCH ORGANIZATION.

The wonderful church organization which was effected through him is in
itself an evidence of his divine inspiration.

If a builder should succeed in erecting one of the most magnificent
structures the world has ever seen, without any previous training
and without any plans to guide him, he would be looked upon as the
most remarkable genius that ever was known. The church organization
instituted by Joseph Smith is like a complete structure, perfect in
every detail, and yet built up piece by piece without any preconceived
plan being drawn up or experiment being made, so far as the Prophet
was concerned. The only idea he had of the grand system he was putting
in order was revealed to him at various times as occasion required.
But when the whole order of church government was revealed it was
discovered to be perfect, and though the Church has now existed for
sixty-eight years there has never arisen any occasion for changing the
order laid down in the beginning. Its workings have been harmonious
in every detail; and should the Church increase {260} in numbers
indefinitely there would be no occasion for making any change in the
system revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

ALL HIS WORKS PROCLAIM HIM A PROPHET.

A thorough acquaintance with the works of Joseph Smith must convince
the student of them that he was truly a Prophet of God. If it be denied
that he was such, how shall the superior wisdom that prompted his words
and actions be accounted for? His ideas of theology, of philosophy,
of statesmanship, and even astronomy and other branches of learning,
were far in advance of what was known to the world in his day; and
since then many of his doctrines have been accepted by the learned, and
advocated as new discoveries. The most reasonable way of accounting for
the wonderful works of Joseph Smith is to acknowledge that he was a
Prophet of God, sent as a divine messenger to open up the dispensation
of the fullness of times, and to prepare for the second coming of the
Lord Jesus Christ, whose glorious reign is near at hand.



THE BOOK OF MORMON.

AN EVIDENCE OF THE INSPIRATION OF JOSEPH SMITH.

ITS PURPORT.

Before the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized,
the Prophet Joseph Smith brought forth a book--the most remarkable work
of the age. It purports to give an account of the ancient people of the
American continent and the dealings of the Lord with them. The Prophet
claimed that it was translated by the power of the Lord from writings
engraved upon plates that had the appearance of gold. The plates
were found buried on the side of a hill in New York state, and their
whereabouts was revealed to the Prophet by an angel.

This explanation of the origin of the book, called the Book of Mormon,
was most incredible to many of those who heard it, for angels had long
since ceased to visit mankind; and they had been taught that the age
of prophets and revelation was past. But the fact that the book was
in existence could not be denied, for it was printed and published to
the {261} world. To charge Joseph Smith or any other man or set of men
with having written it for the purpose of deception would be equal to
attributing to man super-human wisdom, and ability that is possessed
only by heavenly beings. It would be giving him much less credit
for supernatural ability to accept his own claim that he was merely
inspired of the Lord to bring the book forth; for all the learned men
in the world could not by their own wisdom produce such a work as the
Book of Mormon. As evidence of this assertion, it is only necessary
to become acquainted with the contents of the book. If a person will
take the pains to read it he will find it refers in the course of
the narrative it contains, to many facts of history, and numerous
geographical and geological statements. Besides, it teaches religious
doctrines, and records a great many prophecies.

IMPOSSIBLE TO WRITE WITHOUT DIVINE AID.

Now just consider what an impossible task it would be for any man,
without divine aid, to write an historical narrative of this character.
It is filled with hundreds of statements concerning history, geography,
geology, and religion, and yet does not contain one assertion regarding
any of these subjects that does not agree in perfect harmony with
what is known respecting them. It might be claimed that with a great
amount of research it would be possible for a writer to do this;
its statements agree also with every fact respecting the topics it
mentions, that has become known during the many years of research
since the Book was published, and that, too, in this age of critical
investigation.

Again, the book contains as much reading matter as does the Old
Testament. It is a continuous, unbroken history of a people for a
thousand years, written originally by a succession of historians. Facts
mentioned by one writer are referred to quite frequently by another, so
that it would be no easy matter for a most careful writer with all the
ingenuity that man is capable of exercising to originate a work of such
character and magnitude without it making contradictions of itself.

PROPHECIES IN THE BOOK OF MORMON.

Whatever success an impostor might have in deceiving people with a
fictitious book, there are some things he cannot do. Should he succeed
in making the book consistent with all known truths of history, science
and religion, he would find it impossible to make accurate predictions
concerning {263} the future. This power is not possessed by man, unless
conferred upon him by the Lord. The Book of Mormon cannot therefore be
classed among human impositions, for it contains prophecies that were
not fulfilled at the time it was published, but that have since been
verified.

Speaking of the coming forth in this age of the record which he
compiled, the Prophet Mormon says,

    "And it shall come in a day when the blood of saints shall cry unto
    the Lord, because of secret combinations and the works of darkness."

The Book of Mormon was printed before the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints was organized, so that it could not be told at that
time, except by inspiration that the blood of saints in the present
age should cry unto the Lord, because of the works of darkness. There
was no religious persecution going on at that time; but it was not
long before the blood of many of the Latter-day Saints was shed as the
result of persecution.

A BIBLE! A BIBLE!

The Prophet Nephi, referring also to the period when the record should
be revealed in the latter time, and when the Lord should proceed to
recover His chosen people, the house of Israel, records the words of
the Lord to him as follows:

    "And my words shall hiss forth unto the ends of the earth, for a
    standard unto my people, which are the house of Israel. And because
    my words shall hiss forth, many of the Gentiles shall say, a Bible!
    a Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible."

Since the publication of the Book of Mormon the Lord's words have gone
forth "unto the ends of the earth," and the Latter-day Saints who
have carried His words and declared them in nearly all countries have
usually been answered with these words, "A Bible! a Bible! We have got
a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible." The general belief is
that the Bible is the only book in existence containing the word of the
Lord.

ISAIAH'S PROPHECY.

The Prophet Nephi reiterates the prediction recorded in the
twenty-ninth chapter of Isaiah, concerning the coming forth of a book,
and which the Latter-day Saints maintain refers to the Book of Mormon.
The prophecy is as follows:

    "And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book
    that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying,
    Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed:
    and the {263} book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying,
    Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned. Wherefore
    the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their
    mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their
    heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the
    precept of men: therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous
    work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder: for the
    wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of
    their prudent men shall be hid. . . . . And in that day shall the
    deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall
    see out of obscurity, and out of darkness." (Isaiah 29: 11, 12, 13,
    14, 18).

The first part of this prophecy was literally fulfilled when a man
named Martin Harris, with the permission of Joseph Smith, took a
copy of some of the characters from which the Book of Mormon was
translated--the "words of a book"--to Professor Anthon, a learned
professor of languages in New York City, and the latter made the
statement, "I cannot read a sealed book." Unwittingly, he used almost
the identical words of Isaiah's prediction.

"And the book is delivered to him that is not learned,"--this was
fulfilled when the book was delivered to Joseph Smith, an unlearned
youth. How accurately this prophecy was fulfilled is shown by the
fact that the _words_ of the book were delivered to the man that was
learned, while the book itself was delivered to him that was not
learned.

The portion of the prophecy which reads: "Therefore, behold I will
proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous
work and a wonder," is also being fulfilled. The work done by the
Lord through the instrumentality of His servant Joseph Smith and the
Latter-day Saints, is looked upon as marvelous even by those who do not
believe Joseph Smith to be a prophet, nor the Latter-day Saints to be
inspired of Heaven, for this work attracts the attention of the whole
world. An acquaintance with what the Lord has done and with what is now
being done through their ministry is of sufficient importance to be
called "a marvelous work and a wonder." The Gospel has been preached
in nearly all the civilized and several of the uncivilized nations,
a church has been established that attracts the attention of all the
world, and its name and the prophet's name are known among every
nation; a commonwealth has been built up that has won the admiration
of all that are acquainted with it; people from all nations have been
gathered together to form this commonwealth; and missionaries by the
thousands are sent to proclaim to mankind everywhere the glad tidings
of the "marvelous work."

{264} Since the restoration of the Gospel with all its blessings in
these latter days the remainder of Isaiah's words have been verified.
The deaf have been healed and enabled to "hear the words of the book,"
and the blind have had their sight restored, and have thus been enabled
to "see out of obscurity, and out of darkness."

BOOK GIVES A TEST OF ITS TRUTH.

The last chapter in the Book of Mormon contains these words:

    "And when ye shall receive these things," [the records contained
    in the Book of Mormon] "I would exhort you that ye would ask God,
    the eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not
    true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with a real intent,
    having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you,
    by the power of the Holy Ghost."

Here is a promise that no impostor would dare to make, for he could
not expect it to be fulfilled, and it would only furnish a means of
detecting his deception.

The spirit in which the Book of Mormon is written is of such a nature
that it impresses the reader with the honesty and earnestness of the
writer. Its language is very plain, showing that the writer made no
attempt at literary embellishment, but had only one object in view,
which was to state the simple facts, and make the Gospel plain for the
benefit of mankind. The style of the writing is peculiar to itself, and
different from all other writings extant. These facts concerning the
character of the book prove its authenticity.

ATTESTED BY DIRECT EVIDENCE.

The truth of the Book of Mormon is attested by the strongest direct
evidence that it is possible to obtain. To show this it will perhaps
be as well to consider what constitutes direct evidence. Evidence
is understood to be the means of proving an unknown or a disputed
fact. There is what is called "circumstantial evidence" and "direct
evidence." The first is that kind of testimony which deals with
circumstances that are connected with the fact to be proven. As, for
example, footprints in the snow, are proof to an observer of them
that someone has been where the snow lies since it fell, although the
observer has not seen any person there. The marks in the snow are
circumstantial evidence that he is correct in his conclusion. Direct
evidence is the testimony of a witness to what he has seen, felt, or
known by his own senses.

{265} It is a question of dispute whether direct or circumstantial
evidence is the stronger, though the first is usually considered so. As
against direct evidence it is claimed that witnesses may be mistaken,
deceived or may wilfully falsify, while circumstances it is said cannot
mislead.

The evidences already set forth to prove the truth of the Book of
Mormon are what would be called circumstantial. The only evidence
mankind have, aside from inspiration, that the Bible is true is
indirect or circumstantial. What is unique about the Book of Mormon
is that it is sustained by direct testimony, corroborated by
circumstantial evidence which proves that the witnesses were not
mistaken nor deceived, and that they did not tell falsehoods. Following
the title page of the Book of Mormon is printed the testimony of three
witnesses, who give their deposition in the following earnest and
emphatic words:

TESTIMONY OF THREE WITNESSES.

    "Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto
    whom this work shall come, that we, through the grace of God the
    Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which
    contain this record, which is a record of the people of Nephi, and
    also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of
    Jared, who came from the tower of which hath been spoken; and we
    also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of
    God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a
    surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen
    the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown
    unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare with
    words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and
    he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the
    plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the
    grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld
    and bear record that these things are true; and it is marvelous
    in our eyes, nevertheless the voice of the Lord commanded us that
    we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the
    commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know
    that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the
    blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat
    of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And
    the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
    which is one God. Amen.

    "Oliver Cowdery,

    "David Whitmer,

    "Martin Harris."

No stronger testimony of the existence of a fact ever has been or can
be given than this. Nothing less than a direct revelation from heaven
to an individual personally can furnish him more convincing proof than
is given by the testimony of {266} these three witnesses. What greater
evidence can one ask or desire than this? Here is the most solemn
statement made by three men, of sound mind and strict veracity who
say the voice of God declared unto them that the Book of Mormon was
translated by the gift and power of God, and that an angel from heaven
showed them the plates from which the record was translated, and that
they know it to be true. Such testimony would be ample to establish a
claim in any court on earth.

TESTIMONY OF WITNESSES UNCHANGED.

Many years after the first publication of the Book of Mormon with the
names of the three witnesses attached, a gentleman inquired of Oliver
Cowdery if he believed the Book of Mormon to be true. The questioner
read from the book the names of the three witnesses, and exclaimed,
"Mr. Cowdery, do you believe this book?"

"No, sir," was Cowdery's reply.

"But," said the gentleman, "your name is attached to it, and you
declare here that you saw an angel, and also the plates from which the
book purports to be translated; and now you say you don't believe it.
Which time did you tell the truth?"

Mr. Cowdery replied, "My name is attached to that book and what I
there have said is true. I did see this; I know I saw it, and faith
has nothing to do with it, as a perfect knowledge has swallowed up the
faith which I had in the work, knowing, as I do, that it is true."

A few days previous to his death David Whitmer, another of the
witnesses, called his family and a number of his friends together and
delivered to them his dying testimony. To his physician he said, "Dr.
Buchanan, I want you to say whether or not I am in my right mind before
I give my last testimony." The doctor replied,

"Yes, you are in your right mind, for I have just had a conversation
with you."

Then, addressing all who were gathered at his bedside, he said, "Now
you must be faithful in Christ. I want to say to you all that the Bible
and the record of the Nephites (Book of Mormon,) are true, so you can
say that you have heard me bear my testimony on my deathbed. All be
faithful in Christ and your reward will be according to your works. God
bless you all. My trust is in Christ forever, worlds without end. Amen."

Martin Harris, the third witness, continued to testify to {267} the
truth of his statement concerning the Book of Mormon until the day of
his death, which occurred July 10, 1875. The three men were regarded by
their neighbors as strictly truthful and honest.

TESTIMONY OF EIGHT WITNESSES.

Besides the three above named witnesses, there are eight others whose
testimony concerning the Book of Mormon is given to the world. Their
testimony is as follows:

    "Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people unto
    whom this work shall come, that Joseph Smith, Jr., the translator
    of this work, has shewn unto us the plates of which hath been
    spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the
    leaves as the said Smith has translated, we did handle with our
    hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the
    appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we
    bear record with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shewn
    unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the
    said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we give
    our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that we have
    seen; and we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

    "Christian Whitmer, Hiram Page, Jacob Whitmer, Joseph Smith, Sen.,
    Peter Whitmer, Jr., Hyrum Smith, John Whitmer, Samuel H. Smith."

SECULAR PROOF OF THE BOOK OF MORMON.

Proof that the Book of Mormon is authentic will also establish the
divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Herewith are presented some
of the external or outside evidences of the truth of that remarkable
work known as the Book of Mormon.

The principal statements contained in the Book of Mormon concerning
which there is a possibility of confirmation or corroboration in the
annals of modern exploration and research are these:

1. That America was once peopled by a colony who went from Asia at the
time of the confusion of tongues, when the inhabitants of the earth
undertook to build the Tower of Babel; and that these colonists and
their descendants flourished for a period of some sixteen or seventeen
centuries, being a highly civilized race, but finally became extinct.

2. That America was again peopled, this time by a colony of the Hebrew
race which came from Jerusalem 600 years B. C. That they observed the
laws of Moses, had a record of the creation, the flood, etc.

{268} 3. That they, too, developed into a great and highly civilized
commonwealth.

4. That they had a knowledge of the coming of the Christ, and that He
appeared unto them and taught them the Gospel.

5. That terrible convulsions and destruction of life and property took
place at the time of Christ's crucifixion.

COLONISTS FROM THE TOWER OF BABEL.

The Book of Mormon states that a man named Jared, and his brother, and
their families, with some other men and their families, being led by
the Lord, went from the great tower, at the time the Lord confounded
the language of the people, and crossed over to America in barges.
There they multiplied and became a great nation, spreading over the
land northward, or North America. Finally, about 600 years before
Christ the nation became extinct through internal warfare. (See Book of
Ether).

Josephus, the Jewish historian, speaking of the events at the time of
the dispersion from the Tower of Babel says

    "After this they were dispersed abroad, on account of their
    languages, and went out by colonies everywhere; and each colony
    took possession of that land which they light upon, and _unto
    which God led them_; so that the whole continent was filled with
    them, both the inland and maritime countries. There were some also
    who _passed over the sea in ships_, and inhabited the islands."
    --_Antiquities of the Jews_, Book I, Chapter 5.

This account of course does not state specifically that any colony went
to America, but it says that colonies went EVERYWHERE, and that some of
the people went in ships to distant lands, and to places where God led
them.

That two distinct races of civilized beings inhabited ancient America
is testified to by a number of archaeologists and explorers. A
correspondent to the St. Louis (Missouri) _Globe-Democrat_ writing from
Tombstone, Arizona, in 1895, says:

    "The remarkable picture rocks and boulders, with strange symbols
    upon them, left by the pre-historic races of Arizona, have been
    the cause of much discussion among those who have seen them as to
    who these ancient hieroglyphic-makers were. These rock records may
    be divided into three different kinds, which, it is thought, were
    made by _two different races. The first, or very ancient race_,
    left records on rocks, in some instances of symbols only, and in
    other instances of pictures and symbols combined. The later race,
    _which came after the first race had vanished_, made only crude
    representations of animals, birds or reptiles, not using symbols or
    combinations of lines."

{269} Chamber's Encyclopaedia, under the subject heading "Nicaragua"
contains this statement:

    "Nicaragua, like the states north of it, was a center of Aztec
    civilization; but the Aztecs were preceded by another race likewise
    civilized, who have left stone sculptures and monumental remains."

That the origin of the extinct race which formerly inhabited North
America is believed by students of American antiquity to date back to
the time of the building of the Tower of Babel the following gives
evidence:

    "One of the arts known to the builders of Babel was that of
    brickmaking. This art was also known to the people who built the
    works in the West. The knowledge of copper was known to the people
    of the plains of Shinar; for Noah must have communicated it, as
    he lived a hundred and fifty years among them after the flood.
    Also copper was known to the antediluvians. Copper was also known
    to the authors of the western monuments. Iron was known to the
    antediluvians. It was also known to the ancients of the West.
    However, it is evident that very little iron was among them, as
    very few instances of its discovery in their works have occurred;
    and for this very reason, we draw a conclusion that _they came to
    this country very soon after the dispersion_.--(Priest's _American
    Antiquities_, 1833).

The following is from Rev. D. Lowry's Reply to Official Inquiries
respecting the Aborigines of America, written in 1848, and given in
Schoolcraft's "Ethnological Researches," &c., vol. iii., published in
1853.

    "In view of the best light and information which I have been
    able to collect on the subject, my opinion is that the earliest
    inhabitants of America were the descendants of Ham, the youngest
    son of Noah; and that THE FIRST SETTLEMENT WAS MADE SHORTLY AFTER
    THE CONFUSION OF TONGUES AT THE BUILDING OF THE TOWER OF BABEL.
    Moses tells us that about that period 'the Lord scattered the
    people abroad upon the face of the whole earth.' (Gen. 2: 8, 9).
    America, then, according to this portion of sacred history, was at
    that time re-occupied by man; for the writer could not have meant
    by 'all the earth' only about one-half of it."

Professor T. H. Lewis, an archaeologist of St. Paul, Minnesota, (U. S.
A.), who a few years since, made some explorations among the mounds
and earthworks of North Dakota, is of the opinion that there were
two separate races in Ancient America. He derived this opinion from
examining mounds and their contents, which are found in that locality
and in many other parts of North America. (Correspondent to Denver
_News_, 1890.)

Professor F. W. Putnam, in an article in the _Century Magazine_ for
March, 1890, on "Prehistoric Remains in the Ohio Valley," advocates
his belief, based upon discoveries and {270} observations in ancient
burying grounds, that two races have inhabited America in olden times,
and that one originated from the north and the other from the south.

The Book of Mormon makes it clear that the Jaredites occupied that part
of the country known as North America, (See Book of Omni, 1: 23), while
the race that succeeded them originated in South America, but spread
towards the north. (See Book of Alma, 22: 30-34).

A correspondent writing to the New York _Herald_ from San Diego,
California, under date of December 10, 1849, says:

    "Unlike anything heretofore discovered on this continent, or indeed
    in the whole world, we here have presented to our views, as we now
    firmly believe, the unbroken history of a people that existed not
    only for a great length of time since the building of the Egyptian
    pyramids, but contemporary with them, and, what is more wonderful
    still, far back and yet still farther into the mazes of antiquity."

In Harper's _Weekly_ for October, 1879, (published in New York), is an
article by Henry C. Walsh, entitled "Copan: a City of the Dead." In it
he says:

    "During the progress of the excavations made by the last Peabody
    expedition Mr. Gordon discovered a stone pavement at the southern
    end of the great plaza. By digging downwards he came to the walls
    and chambers of a building more ancient than and of a different
    character from those now above the surface. Here were found
    tablets inscribed with characters varying materially from those
    on the known monuments. In the adjoining structures above ground
    were found blocks of stone, used in the construction, which
    had evidently been cut from older sculptures. _All this points
    to successive periods of occupation_, of which there are other
    evidences."

ORIGIN BEFORE THE CHRISTIAN ERA.

The Book of Mormon states that about 600 years before the birth of
Christ a small colony of the Hebrew race left Jerusalem and was led
by the Lord to the shores of America. This colony was composed, on
the commencement of its journey, of two heads of families, Lehi and
Ishmael, their wives and children, and a man named Zoram. They observed
the law of Moses, and took with them a record of their forefathers,
containing the five books of Moses, giving an account of the creation
of the world, of Adam and Eve, and also of the Jews from the beginning
down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah, king of Judah. This
record was engraved on plates of brass. The youngest of the four sons
of Lehi, Nephi by name, was the leading spirit in the company. He
also commenced a record of their doing, which he engraved {271} upon
plates of metal in the language of the Egyptians, and in what their
descendants called reformed Egyptian characters. (See I Nephi, also
Mosiah 1: 4, and Mormon 9: 32-33).

That the origin of the American Indians dates back to some period
before the Christian era is testified to by a number of archaeologists.
Professor Waterman, of Boston, Massachusetts, in a lecture delivered
in the Fine Arts Academy, Bristol, in 1849, speaking of the time the
forefathers of the Indians went to America, says:

    "When and whence, then, did they come? Albert Galatin, one of
    the profoundest philologists of the age, concluded that, so far
    as language afforded any clue, the time of their arrival could
    not have been long after the dispersion of the human family. Dr.
    Morton, after a series of investigations of many of the human
    crania found in the sepulchral mounds concluded that they must have
    dated back _at least_ 2000 _or_ 3000 _years_. It would not seem
    that all the family to which they belonged came with them, as they
    were but representatives of a people still in existence in the Old
    World, or who had become extinct since they emigrated. This people
    could not have been created in Africa, for its inhabitants were
    widely dissimilar to those of America; nor in Europe, which was
    without a native people agreeing at all with American races: then
    to Asia alone could they look for the origin of the American."

Not only does the above quotation express the opinion of scholars that
the race referred to originated before the Christian era, but that it
originated in Asia, which agrees with the statements in the Book of
Mormon.

The following is taken from the Abb Don Lorenzo Hervas' Letter to the
Abb Clavigero upon the Mexican Calendar, translated by Cullen and
published in England in 1787:

    "This Calendar has not been the discovery of the Mexicans, but a
    communication from some more enlightened people; and as the last
    are not to be found in America, we must seek for them elsewhere,
    in Asia or in Egypt. This supposition is confirmed by your
    affirmation, that the Mexicans had their Calendar from the Toltecas
    (originating from Asia), whose year, according to Boturini, was
    exactly adjusted by the course of the sun, _more than a hundred
    years before the Christian era_."

Dr. Wendell Mees, of Ithaca, New York, in an article published in a
Scandinavian paper, _Verdens Gang_, sets forth his views in regard to
the origin of the Aztecs, or ancient inhabitants of Mexico. He is of
the belief that they went over to America "_as early as the fourth
century before Christ_."

OF HEBREW ORIGIN.

The evidences that the American Indians are of Hebrew origin are quite
numerous and most conclusive.

{272}

The following is from Adair's "_History of the American Indians_,"
published in London, in 1775:

    "All the various nations of Indians seem to be of one descent. They
    call a buffalo, in their various dialects, by one and the same
    name, 'Yanasa.' And there is a strong similarity of religious rites
    and of civil and martial customs among all the various American
    nations of Indians we have any knowledge of on the extensive
    continent, as will soon be shown. Their language is copious
    and very expressive, for their narrow orbit of ideas, and full
    of rhetorical tropes and figures, like the orientalists. . . .
    From the most exact observations I could make in the long time
    I traded among the Indian Americans, I was forced to believe
    them lineally descended from the Israelites, either while they
    were a maritime power or _soon after the general captivity_: the
    latter, however, is the most probable. ... As the Israelites were
    divided into tribes, and had chiefs over them, so the Indians
    divide themselves. Each tribe forms a little community within the
    nation; and as the nation hath its particular symbol, so hath each
    tribe the badge from which it is denominated. The sachem of each
    tribe is a necessary party in conveyances and treaties, to which
    he affixes the mark of his tribe, as a corporation with us doth
    their public seal. If we go from nation to nation among them, we
    shall not find one who doth not lineally distinguish himself by
    his respective family. . . . Every town has a state-house, or
    synedrion, as the Jewish sanhedrim, where, almost every night,
    the head men convene about public business. . . . These Indian
    Americans pay their religious devoir to _Loak Ishtohoollo-Aba_,
    'the great, beneficent, supreme, holy spirit of fire,' who resides
    (as they think) above the clouds, and on earth also with unpolluted
    people. He is with them the sole author of warmth, light, and
    of all animal and vegetable life. They do not pay the least
    perceivable adoration to any images, or to dead persons, neither
    to the celestial luminaries, nor evil spirits, nor any created
    being whatsoever. . . . They flatter themselves with the name
    _hottuh oretoopah_, 'the beloved people,' because their supposed
    ancestors, as they affirm, were under the immediate government of
    the Deity, who was present with them in a very particular manner,
    and directed them by prophets, while the rest of the world were
    aliens and outlaws to the covenant. . . . The Indian language and
    dialects appear to have the very idiom and genius of the Hebrew.
    Their words and sentences are expressive, concise, emphatical,
    sonorous, and bold, and often, both in letters and signification,
    synonymous with the Hebrew language. . . They use many plain
    religious emblems of the Divine names, Yohewah, Yah, and Ale; and
    these are the roots of a prodigious number of words through their
    various dialects. . . In conformity to, or after the manner of the
    Jews, the Indian Americans have their prophets, high priests, and
    others of a religious order. As the Jews had a sanctum sanctorum,
    or most holy place, so have all the Indian nations. . . . . The
    Indian tradition says that their forefathers were possessed of
    an extraordinary divine spirit, by which they foretold things
    future, and controlled the common course of nature; and this they
    transmitted to their offspring, provided they obeyed the sacred
    laws annexed to it. . . . As the prophets of the Hebrews had
    oracular {273} answers, so the Indian magi (who are to invoke Yo
    He Wah and mediate with the supreme holy fire, that he may give
    seasonable rains), have a transparent stone of supposed great power
    in assisting to bring down the rain. . . . The Hebrews offered
    _daily sacrifice_. . . . The Indians have a similar religious
    service. . . . The Indians have among them the resemblance of the
    Jewish _sin offering_ and _trespass-offering_. . . . The Indians
    observe another religious custom of the Hebrews in making a
    _peace-offering_. . . . They always celebrate the annual expiation
    of sins in their religious temples. The red Hebrews imagine their
    temples to have such a typical holiness, more than any other
    place, that if they offered up the Annual Sacrifice elsewhere,
    it would not atone for the people. . . . The Hebrews had various
    _ablutions_ and _anointings_, according to the Mosaic ritual,
    and all the Indian nations constantly observe similar customs
    from religious motives. . . . In the coldest weather, and when
    the ground is covered with snow, against their bodily ease and
    pleasure, men and children turn out of their warm houses or stoves,
    reeking with sweat, singing their usual sacred notes, _Yo, Yo_,
    &c., at the dawn of day, adoring Yo He Wah, at the gladsome sight
    of the morn; and thus they skip along, echoing praises, till they
    get to the river, when they instantaneously plunge into it. . . .
    This law of purity (bathing in water) was essential to the Jews,
    and the Indians to this day would exclude the men from religious
    communion who neglected to observe it. . . . 'Tis well known that
    oil was applied by the Jews to the most sacred as well as common
    uses: their kings, prophets, and priests, at their inauguration
    and consecration, were _anointed with oil_. . . . Like the Jews,
    the greatest part of the Southern Indians _abstain_ from the most
    things that are in themselves, or in general apprehension of
    mankind, loathsome, or _unclean_. . . . They reckon all birds of
    prey and birds of night to be unclean and unlawful to be eaten. . .
    None of them will eat of any animal whatsoever, if they either know
    or suspect that it died of itself. . . . They reckon all those
    animals to be unclean that are either carnivorous or live on nasty
    food, as hogs, wolves, panthers, foxes, cats, mice, rats. . . . The
    Indians, through a strong principle of religion, abstain in the
    strictest manner from eating the _blood_ of any animal. . . . The
    Indian _marriages, divorces_, and _punishments_ of _adultery_ still
    retain a strong likeness to the Jewish laws and customs in these
    points. . . . . Many other of the Indian _punishments_ resemble
    those of the Jews. . . The Indians strictly adhere more than the
    rest of mankind to that positive, unrepealed law of Moses, 'He
    who sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.' . . .
    There never was any set of people who pursued the Mosaic law of
    _retaliation_ with such a fixed eagerness as these Americans. . .
    They forgive all crimes at the Annual Atonement of sins, except
    murder, which is always punished with death. . . . The Israelites
    had _cities of refuge_, or places of safety, for those who killed
    a person unawares and without design. . . . According to the same
    particular divine law of mercy, each of these Indian nations have
    either a house or town of refuge, which is a sure asylum to protect
    a manslayer, or the unfortunate captive, if they can once enter
    into it Before the Indians go to war, they have many preparatory
    ceremonies of _purification_ and _fasting_, like what is recorded
    of the Israelites. . . . The Indian ark is deemed so sacred and
    dangerous to be touched, either by their own sanctified warriors
    or the spoiling enemy, that they durst not {274} touch it upon
    any account. . . . The warriors consider themselves as devoted
    to God, apart from the rest of the people, while they are at war
    accompanying the sacred ark with the supposed holy things it
    contains. . . . When they return home victorious over the enemy,
    they sing the triumphal song to Yo He Wah, ascribing the victory to
    him, according to a religious custom of the Israelites, who were
    commanded always to attribute their success in war to Jehovah, and
    not to their swords and arrows.

    "The Indian manner of _curing their sick_ is very similar to that
    of the Jews. They always invoke Yo He Wah a considerable space of
    time before they apply any medicines, let the case require ever so
    speedy an application. The more desperately ill their patients are,
    the more earnestly they invoke the Deity on the sad occasion. . . .
    The Indians deem the curing their sick or wounded a very religious
    duty, and it is chiefly performed by their supposed prophets and
    magi, because they believe they are inspired with a great portion
    of divine fire. . . . The surviving brother, by Mosaic law, was to
    _raise seed_ to a deceased brother who left a widow childless, to
    perpetuate his name and family, and inherit his goods and estate,
    or be degraded. The Indian custom looks the very same way; yet
    it is in this as in their law of blood--the eldest brother can
    redeem. . . Emanuel de Moraes and Acosta affirm that the Brazilians
    marry in their own family or tribe. And Jo. de Laet says they call
    their uncles and aunts 'fathers and mothers,' which is a custom of
    the Hebrews and of all our North American Indians; and he assures
    us they mourn very much for their dead, and that their clothes are
    like those of the early Jews. . . Acosta writes that the clothes
    of the South American Indians are shaped like those of the ancient
    Jews. . . Laet, (in his description of America), and Escarbotus
    assure us they often heard the South American Indians to repeat the
    sacred word _Halliluiah_, which made them admire how they first
    attained it. And Malvenda says that the natives of St. Michael had
    tombstones, which the Spaniards digged up, with several ancient
    Hebrew characters upon them. Peter Martyr writes that the Indian
    widow married the brother of her deceased husband, according to
    the Mosaic law. . . . Robert Williams, the first Englishman in New
    England, who is said to have learned the Indian language, in order
    to convert the natives, believed them to be Jews."

Squier's "Antiquities of the State of New York," published in Buffalo,
in 1851, confirms a number of the statements made by Adair, which are
reproduced in the above extracts from his "History of the American
Indians." Squier's work also mentions other similarities that exist
between the customs of the Israelites and the Indians.

INDIAN CUSTOMS.

Schoolcraft's "Ethnological Researches," Vol. I (published in 1851)
says respecting some of the Indians' customs:

    "In regard to the manners, customs, habits, &c, of the wild tribes
    of the Western territory, a true and more correct type than any
    I have ever seen may be found in the ancient history of the Jews
    or {275} Israelites after their liberation from Egyptian bondage.
    The 'Medicine Lodge' of the Indian may be compared to the place of
    worship or tabernacle of the Jews; and the sacrifices, offerings,
    purifications, ablutions, and anointings may be all found amongst
    and practiced by those people. The manner of mourning for a
    deceased relative is very similar to that of the Israelites. . . .
    There could be very numerous and similar analogies made between the
    manners and customs of those people and those of the Jews."

The following is taken from Civero and Von Tscudi's "_Peruvian
Antiquities_," translated from the original Spanish by Dr. Hawks, and
published in New York in 1854.

    "Like the Jews, the Indians offer their first fruits; they
    keep their new moons, and the feast of expiations at the end
    of September, or in the beginning of October; they divide the
    year into four seasons, corresponding with the Jewish festivals.
    According to Charlevoix and Long, the brother of a deceased husband
    receives his widow into his house as a guest, and after a suitable
    time considers her as a legitimate consort. In some parts of North
    America circumcision is practiced, and of this Acosta and Lopez
    de Gomara make mention. But that which most tends to fortify the
    opinion as to the Hebrew origin of the American tribes, is a
    species of ark, seemingly like that of the Old Testament; this the
    Indians take with them to war: it is never permitted to touch the
    ground, but rests upon stones or pieces of wood, it being deemed
    sacrilegious and unlawful to open it or look into it. The American
    priests scrupulously guard their sanctuary, and the high priest
    carries on his breast a white shell adorned with precious stones,
    which recalls the _Urim_ of the Jewish high priest; of whom we are
    also reminded by a band of white plumes on his forehead."

INDIAN PRACTICE RESEMBLING THE PASSOVER.

    "It is not generally known that there is a marvelous coincidence
    between the traditional stories of the North American Indians and
    the Bible story of the Israelites in Egypt. For instance, in the
    spring of each year, about the time of the Jewish Passover, a white
    dog--the animal must be without spot and blemish--is sacrificed
    by the Blood Indians of North-West Canada. The coincidence would
    be greater if a sheep were used; but there _are no sheep_ in the
    territory, and hence a white dog is used. The blood of the animal
    is then sprinkled on the entrances to the Indian tepees or wigwams.
    The flesh, of the animal is afterwards roasted at midnight, and the
    whole camp partake of it, _with loins girt_, and in full marching
    order, just as the Israelites did in the time of Pharaoh. When
    the food has been eaten, the entire camp silently march into the
    woods, a distance of several miles. There the medicine-men go
    apart, and privately plant some tobacco-seed, the fruit of which,
    when ripe, is used for the same ceremony the following year. This
    is a marvelous coincidence, and the missionaries to that region
    say the custom has been handed down from times immemorial. This
    curious tradition is now published for the first time."--_Sunday
    Companion_, November 28, 1896.

{276}

TRADITION OF A SACRED BOOK. A work on the origin of the American
Indians, by C. Colton, (London, 1833), says respecting their
traditional belief:

    "They assert that a book was once in possession of their
    ancestors, and along with this recognition they have traditions
    that the Great Spirit used to foretell to their fathers future
    events; that He controlled nature in their favor; that angels
    once talked with them; that all the Indian tribes descended from
    one man, who had twelve sons; that this man was a notable and
    renowned prince, having great dominions; and that the Indians, his
    posterity, will yet recover the same dominion and influence. They
    believe, by tradition, that the spirit of prophecy and miraculous
    interposition, once enjoyed by their ancestors, will yet be
    restored to them, and that they will recover the book, all of which
    has been so long lost."

This tradition is a remarkable corroboration of the record contained in
the Book of Mormon.

The testimony on record to prove that the Ancient Indians are of
Israelitish origin is too voluminous to reproduce here. The above
is sufficient and conclusive. Lord Kingsborough's great work on the
"Antiquities of Mexico," published in 1830-37, was written especially
to prove that the Indians were Israelites.

ACQUAINTED WITH THE OLD TESTAMENT RECORD.

That the ancient inhabitants of America were acquainted with the record
of many events recorded in the Old Testament is amply shown by their
traditions, their paintings, books and inscriptions.

Lord Kingsborough says concerning the Mexican Indians:

    "I cannot fail to remark that one of the arguments which persuades
    me to believe that this nation descends from the Hebrews is to see
    the knowledge they have of the book of Genesis. . . . .

    "It is impossible on reading what Mexican Mythology records of the
    war in heaven, and the fall of Zontemoque and other rebellious
    spirits; of the creation of light by the word of Toncatlecuti,
    and of the division of the waters; of the sin of Yzclacolinhqui,
    and his blindness and his nakedness; and of the temptation of
    Suchequecal and her disobedience in gathering roses from a tree,
    and the consequent misery and disgrace of herself and all her
    posterity, not to recognize scriptural analogies. But the Mexican
    tradition of the deluge is that which bears the most unequivocal
    marks of having been derived from a Hebrew source. This tradition
    records that a few persons escaped in the Ahuchueti, or ark of
    fir, when the earth was swallowed up by the deluge, the chief of
    whom was named Palecath of Cipaquetona: and he invented the art of
    making wine; that Xelua, one of his descendants, or at least one
    of those who escaped in the ark, was present at the building of
    a high tower, which the succeeding generation constructed with a
    view of escaping from the deluge, should it {277} again occur: the
    Toncatlecutli, incensed at their presumption, destroyed the tower
    by lightning, confounded their language and dispersed them; and
    that Xelua led a colony to the new World."--Mexican _Antiquities_,
    Vol. VI, p. 401.

TRADITION OF MOSES.

The same writer also makes the following statement respecting the
ancient Americans' knowledge of the story of Moses:

    "A very remarkable representation of the ten plagues which God
    sent on Egypt, occurs in the eleventh and twelfth pages of the
    Borgian Ms. Moses is there painted, holding up in his left hand his
    rod, which became a serpent; and, with a furious gesture, calling
    down the plagues upon the Egyptians. These plagues were frogs,
    locusts, lice, flies, etc., all of which are represented in the
    pages referred to; but the last and most dreadful were the thick
    darkness which overspread Egypt for three days, and the death of
    the firstborn of the Egyptians.

    "The curious symbol of one serpent swallowing up others,
    likewise occurs in the nineteenth page of the same Ms. It is not
    extraordinary that the Mexicans, who were acquainted with one
    portion of the exodus--that relating to the children of Israel
    journeying from Egypt--should also not have been ignorant of
    another."

TRADITION OF EVE.

Bernardino de Sahagun, a Franciscan missionary and historian of the
sixteenth century, author of "Historia Universal de Nueva Espaia,"
says concerning the Aztec tradition of Eve:

    "This woman was the first who existed in the world, and the mother
    of the whole human race; who was tempted by the serpent who
    appeared to her in the terrestrial paradise, and discoursed with
    her, to persuade her to transgress the command of God, and that is
    likewise true, that after having committed sin, etc., she bore a
    son and a daughter at the same birth, and that the son was named
    Cain and the daughter Calmana; and that afterwards she brought
    forth a second birth, Abel, and his sister Delborah, so that she
    bore them by twin birth."

Prof. Short, in his "North Americans of Antiquity," page 238, quotes
from the native writer, Intellxochitl, as follows:

TRADITION OF THE FLOOD.

    "It is found in the histories of the Toltecs, that this age and
    first world, as they call it, lasted seventeen hundred and sixteen
    years; then men were destroyed by tremendous rains and lightnings
    from the sky, and even all the land, without exception of anything,
    and the highest mountains were covered up and submerged in water
    'caxolmoletli' or fifteen cubits, and here they add other fables
    of how men came to multiply from the few who escaped from this
    destruction in a toptlipetlacali, this word signifies a close
    chest."

    {278} "No tradition has been more widely spread among nations than
    that of a Deluge. . . . It was the received notion under some
    form or other, of the most civilized people in the Old World, and
    of the barbarians of the New. The Aztecs combined with this some
    particular circumstances of a more arbitrary character, resembling
    the accounts of the east. They believed that two persons survived
    the Deluge, a man named Coxcox and his wife. Their heads are
    represented in ancient painting, together with a boat floating on
    the waters at the foot of a mountain. A dove is also depicted,
    with a hieroglyphical emblem of language in his mouth, which he is
    distributing to the children of Coxcox, who were born dumb. The
    neighboring people of Michoacan, inhabiting the same high plains
    of the Andes, had a still further tradition, that the boat in
    which Tegpi, their Noah, escaped, was filled with various kinds of
    animals and birds. After some time, a vulture was sent out from it,
    but remained feeding on the dead bodies of the giants which had
    been left on the earth, as the waters subsided. The little humming
    bird, _huitzitzilin_, was then set forth, and returned with a twig
    in his mouth. The coincidence of both these accounts with the
    Hebrew and Chaldean narratives is obvious."--"Conquest of Mexico,"
    by W. H. Prescott, (pages 463-4).

LED BY YOUNGEST BROTHER.

Fernando Montesinos, the Spanish historian of Peru says of the
Peruvians:

    "That nation was originated by a people led by four brothers, the
    youngest of these brothers assumed supreme authority, and became
    the first of a long line of sovereigns." (See Book of Mormon, Book
    of Jacob, 1: 9-11).

ENGRAVED ON PLATES OF METAL.

A writer by the name of C. W. Wandell says:

    "There can be no well-founded objection to the Nephite record, from
    the material on which it is engraved; for the gold plate worn on
    Aaron's head, on which was written 'Holiness to the Lord,' proves
    that the idea was known to them. Bishop Watson says: 'The Hebrews
    went so far as to write their sacred books in gold, as we may learn
    from Josephus compared with Pliny.' (Watson's Bib. and Theo. Dic.
    Art. Writings).

    "Nor is the modern, book-like form of the volume any argument
    against its antiquity; for Bishop Watson in the same place says:
    'Those books which were inscribed on tablets of wood, lead, brass
    or ivory were connected together by rings at the back, through
    which a rod was passed to carry them.'"

EGYPTIAN WRITINGS.

A writer in the _Foreign Quarterly Review_ for October, 1836, says:

    "Lastly, the eye of the antiquarian cannot fail to be both
    attracted and fixed by evidences of the existence of two great
    branches of the {279} hieroglyphical language--both having striking
    affinities with the Egyptian, and yet distinguished from it by
    characteristics perfectly American. One is the picture-writing
    peculiar to the Mexicans, and which displays several striking
    traits of assimilation to the anaglyphs, and the historical tablets
    of the Egyptian temples. The second is a pure hieroglyphical
    language, to which little attention has hitherto been called, which
    appears to have been peculiar to the Tultecan or some still more
    ancient nation that preceded the Mexicans; which was as complete
    as the Egyptian in its double constituency of a symbolic and a
    phonetic alphabet, and which, as far as we can judge, appears to
    have rivalled the Egyptian in its completeness, while in some
    respects it excelled it in its regularity and beauty."

    Dr. August Le Plongeon, the eminent archaeologist of New York, in
    the _Review of Reviews_ for July, 1895, announces the discovery of
    the _sacred alphabet_ of the Mayas (the Indian tribe of Central
    America) is practically identical with that of the Egyptians, and
    that the grammatical structure of the two tongues is strikingly
    similar, many words and characters having the same meaning in
    both. His conclusion is that both these people acquired the art of
    writing from a common source.

    This is in strict harmony with the statements made in the Book of
    Mormon. Nephi states in the first chapter of his book (Book or
    Mormon, page 1) that he made his record, which was sacred, in "the
    language of the Egyptians." Mosiah confirms this statement (Mosiah
    1: 4); and Mormon says that it was written in characters which his
    people called "reformed Egyptian," (Mormon 9: 32).

    The Book of Mormon states that the descendants of the colonists
    from the Tower of Babel and of those from Jerusalem attained to
    a high degree of civilization, were acquainted with many arts;
    and also that they became very wicked, and destroyed each other
    in fiercely-fought battles. (See Mormon, chapter 6; also Ether,
    15: 2). The record gives the information that the first nation
    cultivated all kinds of fruit and grain; that they manufactured
    silk and fine linen, and possessed gold, silver and other precious
    things; that they had domestic animals, such as cattle, sheep,
    goats, swine, horses, elephants and others. (See Book of Ether,
    9: 17, 18, 19). The second nation found these same animals in the
    country (see I Nephi 18: 25). It is also recorded that the latter
    people built cities (Alma 21: 2) and temples (II Nephi 5: 16); that
    they had coins of gold and silver (Alma 9: 4-19), and used these
    and other metals in the arts, (Jarom 1: 8); and that many records
    were kept by the people, (Helaman 3: 13).

    The evidences that the ancient peoples of America were {280} highly
    civilized are numerous and undisputable. Only a very few of the
    many descriptions of ancient ruins discovered in various parts of
    America are given in the following extracts:

EVIDENCES OF ADVANCED CIVILIZATION--RUINS DISCOVERED.

    "Much has been done in recent years to throw light upon the history
    of the ancient races of the east, but comparatively little interest
    has been taken, even by American archaeologists and scientists,
    in the ancient and marvelous civilization whose traces are to be
    found scattered over our continent, particularly in Central America
    and Mexico. That a civilization once flourished in these regions,
    much higher than any of the Spanish conquerors found upon their
    arrival, there can be no doubt. By far the most important work
    that has been done among the remains of the old Maya civilization
    has been carried on by the Peabody Museum of Harvard College,
    through a series of expeditions it has sent to the buried city
    now called Copan, in Spanish Honduras. In a beautiful valley near
    the borderland of Guatemala, surrounded by steep mountains and
    watered by a winding river, the hoary city lies wrapped in the
    sleep of ages. The ruins at Copan, although in a more advanced
    state of destruction than those of the Maya cities of Yucatan, have
    a general similarity to the latter in the design of the buildings
    and in the sculptures, while the characters in the inscriptions
    are essentially the same. It would seem, therefore, that Copan
    was a city of the Mayas; but if so it must have been one of their
    most ancient settlements, fallen into decay long before the cities
    in Yucatan reached their prime. The Maya civilization was totally
    distinct from the Aztec or Mexican; it was an older and also a much
    higher civilization.

    "So far the Peabody expeditions have confined their attention to
    the temples and palaces, and though for several seasons quite a
    little army of natives has been engaged in excavating, yet the work
    that has been accomplished amounts to little in comparison with
    that which remains to be done. To clear the main structure alone
    will be the work of years. Could the vast structures be restored,
    our greatest buildings would seem as pygmies in comparison;
    and certainly no city of the modern world could boast such a
    profuseness and richness of carved and sculptured ornamentations."
    --Henry C. Walsh, _in Harper's Weekly, October_, 1897.

INDIANS ALL OF ONE ORIGIN.

Mr. Bradford in his researches into the origin of the red race, adopts
the following conclusions in regard to the ancient occupants of North
America:

    "That they were all of the same origin, branches of the same race
    and possessed of similar customs and institutions.

    "That they were populous and occupied a great extent of territory.

    "That they had arrived at a considerable degree of civilization,
    were associated in large communities and lived in extensive cities.

    "That they possessed the use of many of the metals, such as lead,
    copper, gold, and silver, and probably the art of working in them.

    "That they sculptured in stone and sometimes used that material in
    the construction of their edifices.

    {281} "That they had the knowledge of the arch of receding steps;
    of the art of pottery, producing urns and utensils formed with
    taste and constructed upon the principles of chemical composition;
    and the art of brick-making.

    "That they worked the salt springs, and manufactured salt.

    "That they were an agricultural people, living under the influence
    and protection of regular forms of governments.

    "That they possessed a decided system of religion, and a mythology
    connected with astronomy, which, with its sister science, geometry,
    was in the hands of the priesthood.

    "That they were skilled in the art of fortification.

    "That the epoch of their original settlement in the United States
    is of great antiquity; and

    "That the only indications of their origin to be gathered from
    the locality of their ruined monuments, point toward Mexico."
    --_Baldwin's Ancient America_.

RUINS IN YUCATAN.

    "Yucatan is the grave of a great nation that has mysteriously
    passed away and left behind no history. Every forest embosoms the
    majestic remains of vast temples, sculptured over with symbols of a
    lost creed, and noble cities, whose stately palaces and causeways
    attest in their mournful abandonment the colossal grandeur of
    their builder. They are the gigantic tombs of an illustrious race,
    but they bear neither name nor epitaph. The conscience-stricken
    awe with which the Indian avoids them as he relates a confused
    tradition of a whole people extinguished in blood and fire by his
    forefathers--a ferocious and cannibal race delighting in human
    sacrifices--are all that even conjecture can say of the manner in
    which the ancient occupants of Yucatan were blotted, en masse,
    from the page of existence. The barbarous exterminators remained
    the masters of the country, and built them rude huts under the
    shadow of those immense edifices which are still the marvel and the
    mystery of Yucatan. On many of these singular edifices is stamped
    the blood-red impress of a human hand--a fit symbol of the rule of
    blood to which it has so constantly been the victim. This 'bloody
    hand' was imprinted with evident purpose on the still yielding
    stucco of the new-built walls, and presents every line and curve
    in life-like distinctness; but the explanation of the symbol is
    unknown."--_New York Sun, June 8_, 1848.

ANCIENT GLASS JAR.

    "In the shaft of J. L. Duncan and Co., on the ridge between the
    Middle and South Yubas, in this county, at the distance of 176 feet
    below the surface of the ground, was found, on the 26th December, a
    curiously-fashioned glass bottle or jar, which was dug up in hard
    cement. After removing the reddish coating, an eight of an inch
    thick, which attached to the outside, and thoroughly washing it,
    it was found to be of a light color and perfectly transparent. It
    somewhat resembled a small-sized pickle-jar, but has a longer neck
    and a flat bottom. It must have been lying in the silent spot where
    it was found for many hundred years."--_Nevada Journal_.

A RUINED CITY.

    "I must not, however, forget to mention that there has lately been
    discovered, in the province of Vera Paz, 150 miles north-east
    {282} of Guatemala, buried in a dense forest, and far from any
    settlements, a ruined city, surpassing Copan or Palenque in extent
    and magnificence, and displaying a degree of art to which none of
    the structures of Yucatan can lay claim."--_From a letter by Mr. E.
    G. Squier, read before the American Ethnological Society, October_
    17, 1849.

ANCIENT COINS AND IMPLEMENTS.

    "While some hands were digging out a cellar in Botetourt County,
    Va., they came upon a quantity of coin, consisting of some eight
    pieces, in an iron box about 14 inches square. The coin was larger
    than a dollar, and the inscription in a language wholly unknown
    to any person in the vicinity. Upon digging down some 16 inches
    lower, they came to a quantity of iron implements of singular and
    heretofore unseen shape. Several scientific gentlemen have examined
    into the matter, and have come to the conclusion that the coins,
    together with the other curiosities, must have been placed there at
    an extremely early date, and before the settlement of the country."
    --_New York Despatch_.

The Book of Mormon states that at the time of the Savior's crucifixion
a great and terrible destruction took place upon the continent of
America. It also contains a record of the Savior's appearance and
ministry on that continent after His resurrection. (See III Nephi).

DESTRUCTION AT THE TIME OF THE CRUCIFIXION.

Concerning the destruction that occurred at the time of the
crucifixion, the record says:

    "And it came to pass in the thirty and fourth year, in the first
    month, in the fourth day of the month, there arose a great storm,
    such an one as never had been known in all the land;

    "And there was also a great and terrible tempest; and there was
    terrible thunder, insomuch, that it did shake the whole earth as if
    it was about to divide asunder;

    "And there were exceeding sharp lightnings, such as never had been
    known in all the land.

    "And the city of Zarahemla did take fire;

    "And the city of Moroni did sink into the depths of the sea, and
    the inhabitants thereof were drowned;

    "And the earth was carried up upon the city of Moronihah, that in
    the place of the city thereof, there became a great mountain;

    "And there was a great and terrible destruction in the land
    southward.

    "But behold, there was a more great and terrible destruction in the
    land northward; for behold, the whole face of the land was changed,
    because of the tempest, and the whirlwinds, and the thunderings,
    and the lightnings, and the exceeding great quaking of the whole
    earth;

    "And the highways were broken up, and the level roads were spoiled,
    and many smooth places became rough,

    "And many great and notable cities were sunk, and many were {283}
    burned, and many were shook till the buildings thereof had fallen
    to the earth, and the inhabitants thereof were slain, and the
    places were left desolate;

    "And there were some cities which remained; but the damage thereof
    was exceeding great, and there were many in them who were slain."
    (Ill Nephi 8: 5-15).

RUINS ON THE RIDGE OF A MOUNTAIN,

Mr. William Niven, a well-known American mineralogist of New York gives
the following account of discoveries he made in the mountains of the
state of Guerrero, Mexico. His exploring trip was taken in the year
1894:

    "About noon we camped at a spring in a deep canyon. The guide
    promised to show us the first sign of ruins at a place called Yerba
    Buena. We soon saw the first evidences of pre-historic structures,
    which, however, were little more than foundations. But the surprise
    at the top of the hill removed all doubts of the Indian's veracity,
    for there before us was what was once evidently a great temple,
    occupying a space of 200x300 feet. Climbing to the top of one tower
    I found it covered with charcoal dust to the depth of eighteen
    inches. Then we mounted our horses and traveled till dusk, nearly
    ten miles, among the ruins of what was at one time a great city.
    The houses, substantially built of stone and lime, had been from
    fifty to eighty feet square. The ruins were found only on the
    ridges of the mountains, while on the sides near the summit were
    visible many foundations. After descending from the summit 400 or
    500 feet there were no signs of ruins of any description. . . .
    The ruins which I was fortunate enough to discover in Guerrero are
    very extensive--much more so than I at first supposed. At a rather
    rough estimate I should say that territory of over 900 square miles
    was literally covered, foot by foot, with sections of ruins. Every
    ridge and hilltop bore the remains of ancient temples, some of them
    mammoth in proportions. . . . The ruins have the appearance of
    belonging to one vast city, and subsequent investigations bore out
    my first impressions on the matter. During the time I was occupied
    in excavating I visited the ruins of twenty-two temples, with
    altars in the centre of all of them from five to twenty feet high
    and from ten to fifteen feet square."

Mr. Niven, in giving his opinion about the destruction of the great
city says:

    "Who were these people and how came they to disappear I cannot
    answer. My impression is that once upon a time the country was one
    vast plain. It was probably _submerged by a titanic convulsion of
    nature_, and with it disappeared its people and their primitive
    civilization. Later the _land was thrust up again_, as we see it
    now, a barren, desolate waste. As the nearest water supply is
    several miles distant, and that only a small spring, it is evident
    that some great transformation in nature has taken place since the
    land was populated."

How the ruined city visited by Mr. Niven came to be located upon
mountain ridges can be understood from what is {284} recorded in the
Book of Mormon. The city of Moronihah is mentioned as one which was
destroyed by being covered with earth and a mountain being raised in
place of it. It is quite probable that this pre-historic city situated
in the interior of Mexico met a similar fate to that of Moronihah, and
was thrown up into its present position by some mighty upheaval of the
earth's crust, for it is not at all likely that the city was originally
built upon a mountain. Mr. Niven's impression that the country was
once a vast plain is consistent with what may be inferred from the
account given in the Book of Mormon; and his belief that the remarkable
transformation of the country was caused by some great convulsion of
nature is also in harmony with the statements made in the sacred book,
and goes to confirm the truth of it.

DESTROYED BY THE ACTION OF HEAT.

Another testimony to the destruction that took place, evidences of
which still remain, is given in the following extract from the _San
Francisco Herald_:

    "Captain Walker assures us that the country from the Colorado to
    the Rio Grande, between the Gila and San Juan, is full of ruined
    habitations and cities, most of which are on the table-land. . . .
    On that occasion he had penetrated about midway from the Colorado
    into the wilderness, and had encamped near the Little Red River,
    with the Sierra Blanca looming up to the south, when he noticed at
    a little distance, an object that induced him to examine further.
    As he approached, he found it to be a kind of citadel, around which
    lay the ruins of a city more than a mile in length. It was located
    on a gentle declivity that sloped towards Red River, and the lines
    of the streets could be distinctly traced, running regularly at
    right angles with each other. The houses had all been built of
    stone, but _all had been reduced to ruins by the action of some
    great heat, which had evidently passed over the whole country_. It
    was not an ordinary conflagration, but must have been some fierce,
    furnace-like blast of fire, similar to that issuing from a volcano,
    as the stones were all burnt--some of them almost cindered, others
    glazed as if melted. This appearance was visible in every ruin he
    met with. A storm of fire seemed to have swept over the whole face
    of the country, and the inhabitants must have fallen before it. In
    the centre of this city we refer to rose abruptly a rock of 20 or
    30 feet high, upon the top of which stood a portion of the walls of
    what had once been an immense building. The outline of the building
    was still distinct. . . . All the south end of the building seemed
    to have been burnt to cinders and to have sunk to a mere pile of
    rubbish. Even the rock on which it was built appeared to have been
    partially fused by the heat."

REMAINS FOUND UNDER LAVA BEDS.

In an article which appeared in the San Francisco _Bulletin_ several
years ago, Dr. D. L. Yates, says:

    {285} "It was said that California possesses some of the oldest
    known relics on the continent. The first authenticated record of
    the original occupants was found on the Table Mountain region in
    Tuolumne County, and is of an age prior to the great volcanic
    outburst. Fossil remains of the rhinoceros and an extinct horse
    are found under the lava layers forming the Table Mountains,
    which are 1,400 feet thick, 1,700 feet wide and many hundreds of
    feet high, where the river beds have been washed out and have
    been covered again to the depth of from three thousand to four
    thousand feet more since the flow of the lava. This lava rests on
    a bed of detritus, which is often entered by running tunnels. The
    human relics and stone implements found in these formations give
    evidence of human habitants differing from any known since. There
    have been found spear heads, a pipe of polished stone, two scoops
    of steleitic rock (resembling the grocer's scoop), an implement
    of aragonite, resembling an unbent bow, but the use of which is
    unknown and cannot be conjectured, a stone needle, with notches
    at the larger end, and the finest charmstones that have ever been
    found.

    "There have been brought to light the fossils of nine mastodons,
    twenty elephants, various pachyderms in the Table Mountains,
    numerous evidences of animal life in the calcareous formations in
    the Texas flats, obsidian spear heads, fossils of the elephant,
    horse and camel about Hornites, bones and evidences of pre-historic
    human industry in Tulare, and in Trinity and Siskiyou many proofs
    of the contemporaneous existence of man and extinct mammals."

DISCOVERY OF A HIDDEN CITY.

The Philadelphia Record, z, few years ago published the following
despatch from Fort Davis, Texas:

    "A strange discovery has been lately made by a surveying party
    of the Kansas City, El Paso and Mexico Railroad, at a point in
    Southern Mexico, not very far from Las Cruces. Here, amid a
    tremendous lava flow, a veritable sea of obsidian or black glass, a
    hidden city has been discovered. . . .

    "The obsidian, molten or black glass at the moment of cooling
    evidently became agitated, for it now lies in ragged waves and
    billows of fantastic shape, some of the ridges from twelve to
    fourteen feet high and capped like the sea waves with a combing
    crest of greenish white. The action of the winds and elements have
    literally burned some parts of this region into powdered dust.

    "At the northern extremity, where the unknown city lies partly
    uncovered, the ruins of gigantic stone buildings peer forth
    into the light of day. Some of these buildings are simply
    tremendous. . . .

    "The whirlwind and sand augers have scooped out the dust, and thus
    exposed the city. No legend or story exists to show how or when it
    was founded, or whether it was abandoned or destroyed. The latter
    seems most likely, and probably, too by an earthquake, at some
    remote period which threw the lava and fire up. No volcano is known
    to exist in the neighborhood."

EVIDENCES OF GREAT ERUPTIONS.

Many discoveries have been made that give evidence of great eruptions
in America. The _San Francisco Herald_ stated {286} some years ago that
Mr. Butterfield, in running a tunnel in Table Mountain, near Sonora,
California, found a trunk of a large pine tree, one hundred and ten
feet from the surface of the ground.

Morse's Universal Geography states that in Cincinnati the stump of
a tree was found ninety-nine feet below the surface of the ground,
and another stump containing marks of an axe and iron rust was found
ninety-four feet deep in the earth. Ancient implements have been found
at various depths in the earth, and in widely separated parts of the
country, which all go to confirm the account given in the Book of
Mormon concerning what happened upon the American continent at the time
of the crucifixion.

THE MESSIAH KNOWN TO THE ANCIENT INHABITANTS OF AMERICA.

James Wells, D.D., in the _Sunday Magazine_, says:

    "_A Savior, at once human and divine_, has a supreme place in the
    creed of the Red-man. The thoughtful Indians also felt the pressure
    of the solemn facts and needs of life. They groped in the darkness,
    and stretched forth hands of entreaty to God. In their deep need,
    they yearned for a teacher and helper; and somehow or other, they
    believed that he had come, or would yet come to them. They had dim,
    confused suggestions and cravings that could find their realization
    only in Christ. Their traditions are rich in myths and legends
    which cluster round Hiawatha, the messenger and representative of
    God. They regard Hiawatha as the relative of the Great Spirit and
    they call him 'uncle,' that is, kinsman. Schoolcraft has collected
    the Hiawatha legend in a very interesting book.

    "Hiawatha was a sort of Red Indian Messias. Though a heavenly being
    he was born a child on earth, and his birth was wondrous. He came
    into the world long ago and instituted 'the Grand Medicine.' He had
    super-human powers, and used them all to bless men. In sending him,
    the Creator smiled upon His helpless children. All the evil spirits
    strove against him, but he conquered them and gained strength from
    the struggle. He used to spend days in fasting and prayer, and he
    went about continually doing good. He prophesied that, after he had
    left them, they would take to quarreling and fighting, and that
    they would be driven from their hunting-grounds far westward. He
    told them of the isles of the blest and the land of the hereafter.
    They also believe that he conducts souls to the other world; and
    they expect him to come again to the earth."

THE CROSS AS AN EMBLEM.

Prescott, in his "Conquest of Mexico," page 465, speaks of the
astonishment of the Catholic priests, who accompanied the expedition of
Cortez, and found Christian rites practiced by Indians. He says:

    {287} "They could not suppress their wonder, as they beheld the
    cross, the sacred emblem of their own faith, raised as an object
    of worship in the temples of Anahuac. They met with it in various
    places; and an image of a cross may be seen at this day, sculptured
    in bas-relief on the walls of one of the buildings of Palenque,
    while a figure bearing some resemblance to that of a child is
    held up to it, as if in adoration. Their surprise was heightened,
    when they witnessed a religious rite which reminded them of the
    Christian communion. On these occasions, an image of the tutelary
    deity of the Aztecs was made of flour of maize mixed with blood,
    and, after consecration by the priests, was distributed among
    the people, who, as they ate it, 'showed signs of humiliation
    and sorrow, declaring it was the flesh of the Deity.' How could
    the Roman Catholic fail to recognize the awful ceremony of the
    eucharist? . . . . . With the same feeling they witnessed another
    ceremony, that of the Aztec baptism. . . . The Jewish and Christian
    schemes were strangely mingled together, and the brains of the
    good fathers were still further bewildered by the mixture of
    heathenish abominations, which were so closely intertwined with the
    most orthodox observances. In their perplexity they looked on the
    whole as the delusion of the devil, who counterfeited the rites of
    Christianity and the traditions of the chosen people, that he might
    allure his wretched victims for their own destruction."

KNOWLEDGE OF THE GODHEAD.

    "Las Casas, bishop of Chiapa, relates in his apology, which is in
    Ms., in the convent of St. Dominic, that when he passed through
    the kingdom of Yucatan, he found there a respectable ecclesiastic,
    of mature age; he charged him to proceed into the interior of
    their country, giving him a certain plan of instruction, in order
    to preach to them: at the end of a year, thus he wrote to the
    bishop--he had met with a principal lord, who informed him that
    they believed in God, who resided in heaven, even the Father, the
    Son, and the Holy Spirit. The Father was named Yeona, the Son
    Bahab, who was born of a virgin, named Chibirias, and that of the
    Holy Spirit was called Euach. Bahab, the Son, they said, was put
    to death by Euporo, who scourged Him, and put on His head a crown
    of thorns, and placed Him with His arms stretched upon a beam of
    wood, and that on the third day He came to life, and ascended
    into heaven, where He is with the Father; that immediately after
    the Euach came in His place as a merchant, bringing precious
    merchandise, filling those who would with gifts and graces,
    abundant and divine."--_Antiquities of Mexico_.

    "The virgin is represented by the Indian paintings, of whom the
    great Prophet should be born, and that His own people would
    reject and meditate evil against Him, and would put Him to death;
    accordingly He is represented in the paintings with His hands and
    feet tied to the tree."--_Monarquia Indiana_.

TRADITION OF CHRIST.

Rosales in the "History of Chili," says,

    "The inhabitants of this extreme southern portion of America,
    situated at the distance of so many thousand miles from New Spain,
    and who did not employ paintings to record events, accounted for
    their knowledge of some doctrines of Christianity by saying, that
    in {288} former times they had heard their fathers say, a wonderful
    man had come to that country, wearing a long beard, with shoes
    and a mantle such as the Mexicans carry on their shoulders, who
    performed many miracles, cured the sick with water, caused it
    to rain that their crops of grain might grow, kindled fire at a
    breath, healing the sick, and giving sight to the blind, and that
    he spoke with as much propriety and elegance in the language of
    their country, as if he had always resided in it, addressing them
    in words very sweet and new to them, telling them that the Creator
    of the universe resided in the highest place of heaven, and that
    many men and women resplendent as the sun dwelt with Him."

BAPTISM KNOWN.

Herrera, a Spanish historian of the sixteenth century, in his history
of America, volume 4, page 172, says, "Baptism was known in Yucatan;
the name they gave it signified to be born again."

#STRONG PROOFS OF THE TRUTH OF THE BOOK OF MORMON. # The foregoing
testimony taken from the works of secular writers confirms in a
remarkable manner the historical part of the Book of Mormon, and is
a strong proof that that record is authentic. Much more evidence of
a similar character is to be had, but space will not admit of it
here. The proof adduced in support of the authenticity of the Book
of Mormon by the discoveries and observations of modern explorers is
made the more forcible by the fact that they who have furnished it
were not believers in the divinity of the book. Many, if not all of
them, published to the world the results of their researches, and
their conclusions respecting them, without knowing anything about the
contents of the book, and therefore they had no predilection for it.
It might be truthfully added that among all the discoveries made that
furnish any information respecting the ancient Americans nothing has
been found to conflict with or disprove any assertion contained in that
most remarkable volume, the Book of Mormon.

CONCLUSION.

No attempt has been made herein to present an exhaustive treatise on
Joseph Smith's divine mission. The evidences of his inspiration have
been referred to very briefly; and hundreds of other proofs equally
strong, and which are well known, have not even been mentioned.

The Latter-day Saints do not, however, depend upon outward evidences
for their knowledge that Joseph Smith was a {289} prophet. They have
placed their trust in the promise of the Savior, as recorded by John:

    "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do
    his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or
    whether I speak of myself."

They have also accepted the admonition of the Apostle James:

    "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him."

They have sought to do the will of the Lord, and have prayed to Him
for wisdom and their prayers have been answered. They have received
a testimony from above that the Gospel as revealed anew through the
Prophet Joseph Smith is true. This same source of divine information is
open to every one who will humble himself, and will obey the Gospel,
with an honest desire to serve the Lord.

INDEX OF CHAPTER CONTENTS ON THIS TRACT.

CHAPTER I.

    A Glorious Thought--Should Prophets be Expected in our day?--God's
    Word Indicates that a Prophet should Come--Prophets sent to
    Announce all Important Events--Positive Promise of the Lord to
    send a Messenger--Necessity of Prophets and Apostles in the
    Church--Church Founded upon Prophets and Apostles--Power given
    Apostles and Prophets--Object of Inspired Men in the Church-How
    long they should Remain--Is the Canon of Scripture Full?--Without
    Modern Revelation Bible Prophecies Cannot be Fulfilled--Treatment
    of Prophets in Past Ages--Jesus a Stumbling Stone--Many Prophets
    Rejected--Persecution to Follow all Inspired Teachers--Conclusions
    Drawn from Scriptures Quoted.

CHAPTER II.

    Was Joseph Smith a Prophet?--Testimony of His Works--Judging
    by the Fruits--Joseph Smith's Claim--His Claim Compared with
    Scripture--Predictions that the Gospel should be Restored--Joseph
    Smith Treated the same as Ancient Prophets--Account of Some of
    his Works--Bible Prophecies Fulfilled--Church Organization the
    Same as Formerly--Same Doctrines as in Former Days--The Holy
    Ghost Received--How to Obtain Proof--Outward Proofs--Testimony of
    Witnesses--Ancient Prophecies Being Fulfilled--The Gathering of
    Israel--Gathering Peculiar to Latter-day Saints--Events in the
    History of the Saints--Words of the Psalmist Fulfilled--Isaiah's
    Prediction Fulfilled--A Prophecy of Malachi--Salvation for the
    Dead--Facts Proven.

{290}

CHAPTER III.

    Joseph Smith's Works--Evidence of his Inspiration--Scriptural
    Tests--Prediction of the Angel--None can Stop God's Work--"A
    Marvelous Work"--Testimony of Disinterested Men--Prophecy about
    War--Fulfilled 28 years Afterwards--Predicted Men's Lives Would be
    Spared--The Saints' Exodus Foretold--Gathering Predicted--Joseph
    Smith as an Expounder of Scripture--Church Organization--All his
    Works Proclaim him a Prophet.

CHAPTER IV.

    The Book of Mormon--An Evidence of the Inspiration of Joseph
    Smith--Its Purport--Impossible to Write Without Divine
    Aid--Prophecies in the Book of Mormon--A Bible! A Bible!--Isaiah's
    Prophecy--Book Gives a Test of its Truth--Attested by Direct
    Evidence--Testimony of Three Witnesses--Testimony of Witnesses
    Unchanged--Testimony of Eight Witnesses--Secular Proof of the Book
    of Mormon--Colonists from the Tower of Babel--Origin Before the
    Christian Era--Of Hebrew Origin--Indian Customs--Indian Practice
    Resembling the Passover--Tradition of a Sacred Book--Acquainted
    with the Old Testament Record--Tradition of Moses--Tradition of
    Eve--Tradition of the Flood--Led by Youngest Brother--Engraved
    on Plates of Metal--Egyptian Writings--Evidences of Advanced
    Civilization--Ruins Discovered--Indians all of One Origin--Ruins
    in Yucatan--Ancient Glass Jar--A Ruined City--Ancient Coins and
    Implements--Destruction at the time of the Crucifixion--Ruins on
    the Ridge of a Mountain--Destroyed by the Action of Heat--Remains
    Found under Lava Beds--Discovery of a Hidden City--Evidences of
    Great Eruptions--The Messiah Known to the Ancient Inhabitants
    of America--The Cross as an Emblem--Knowledge of the
    Godhead--Tradition of the Christ--Strong Proofs of the Truth of the
    Book of Mormon--Conclusion.

Footnotes:

1. See Tract No. 3, "Marks of the Church of Christ."

{291}



MARKS OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST.

THE OUTWARD SIGNS BY WHICH IT MAY BE KNOWN.

BY EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.

OUTWARD SIGNS BY WHICH CHRIST S GOSPEL MAY BE KNOWN--CHARACTER OF HIS
CHURCH KNOWLEDGE THE OUTCOME OF TRUE FAITH--HOW IT MAY BE OBTAINED--AN
ILLUSTRATION--PARABLE OF THE SOWER--WHERE IS THE TRUE GOSPEL AND CHURCH
OF CHRIST?

MANY FORMS OF RELIGION.

There are many religions in the world. Teachers of one form of religion
will tell us they are right. Those who teach another form will make the
same claim for themselves. All religions have some truth, or people
would not believe in them.

ONLY ONE PERFECT RELIGION.

The Savior taught only one form of religion. That one is called the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. It embraces all truth, and contains nothing but
truth.

    "There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
    hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
    Father of all." (Ephesians 4: 4, 5, 6).

JESUS CHRIST THE AUTHOR OF SALVATION.

All Christians believe that salvation is only to be gained through
Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world.

    {292} "'I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto
    the Father, but by me." (John 14: 6).

    "For there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby
    we must be saved." (Acts 4: 12).

The holy scriptures justify us in rejecting all religions that do not
teach belief in Christ.

WHICH RELIGION CONTAINS ALL TRUTH?

There are many varieties of religion even among Christian believers.
But the whole truth is what we want. None but the true Gospel can be
acceptable to the Lord.

    "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness." (Matthew
    6: 33).

How are we to know which religion contains all truth?

THE BIBLE WILL GUIDE US.

The Bible will assist us in making this discovery. It tells us many
things which Jesus taught as His Gospel. Any teaching contrary to what
He gave cannot be true.

    "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
    unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
    accursed." (Galatians 1: 8).

The Gospel which the Savior taught has not changed. It is the same
to-day as it was when He dwelt upon the earth.

FAITH A DOCTRINE OF CHRIST.

The first and principal doctrine taught by Christ was faith.

    "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
    whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
    life." (John 3: 16).

Our Savior knew that if people truly had abiding faith in Him they
would follow Him. They would love Him and obey all His teachings.

    "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also."
    (John 14: 13).

    "If a man love me, he will keep my words." (John 14: 23).

REPENTANCE NECESSARY.

Another commandment taught by Christ was that of repentance. {293} True
repentance is sorrow for sins and a turning away from them. The first
words recorded of the Savior's preaching were:

    "Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matthew 4: 17).

Deep humility always accompanies true faith and repentance. Without it
men cannot be saved.

    "Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child
    shall in no wise enter therein." (Luke 18: 17).

In the days of Christ's ministry, those who believed on Him and
sincerely repented of their sins were then ready to receive the next
ordinance of the Gospel. They were humble and willing to obey.

BAPTISM.

Christ was baptized Himself. He told John it was necessary for Him "to
fulfill all righteousness." He taught that it was necessary for all men
to be baptized.

    "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
    into the kingdom of God." (John 3: 5).

    "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." (Mark 16: 16).

Christ's disciples also taught the same. When those who believed
Peter's preaching on the day of Pentecost asked what they should do to
be saved, he replied,

    "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
    Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
    the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2: 38).

These passages of scripture prove that Jesus and His disciples taught
baptism.

THE HOLY SPIRIT.

The last passage quoted shows that the gift of the Holy Ghost was to
be given to those who obeyed the principles of faith, repentance and
baptism.

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

The teachings of the Savior show that it is necessary to observe the
ten commandments given through Moses. Upon one occasion a man asked
what good thing he should do to gain eternal life. Jesus replied, "Keep
the commandments," and then named some of them. (Matthew 19: 17, 18).

{294}

OTHER COMMANDMENTS.

Besides the ten commandments, the Savior gave new ones which He said
should be obeyed. Many of these are recorded in the fifth, sixth and
seventh chapters of Matthew.

TEST DOCTRINES BY CHRIST'S WORD.

In our search for the true Gospel we can safely reject any teaching
that does not agree with Christ's word. Anyone who says we can be saved
without obeying His commandments is in error.

    "Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,
    and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom
    of heaven." (Matthew 5: 19).

    "He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a
    liar, and the truth is not in him." (I John 2: 4).

Any teacher who adds to these any doctrines of men is a false teacher,
and should not be followed.

    "In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
    commandments of men." (Mark 7: 7).

MANY CLAIM TO BE TRUE TEACHERS.

The teachers of many forms of religion claim that they teach these
doctrines of the Gospel of Christ. How are we to decide which one is
right?

HOW FALSE TEACHERS MAY BE KNOWN.

The Savior has furnished a test by which we can prove false teachers.
He says, "Beware of false prophets." (Matthew 7: 15). He further adds,
"Ye shall know them by their fruits." (10). "By their fruits" means by
their works or by their teachings. False prophets or teachers teach
falsehoods, and their works are evil. True prophets teach truth, and
live righteously. They will not teach anything contrary to the words of
the Savior.

HOW TRUE BELIEVERS MAY BE KNOWN.

The Savior tells us how we might know true believers. He says,

    "These signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they
    cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take
    {295} up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall
    not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall
    recover." (Mark 16; 17, 18).

The nineteenth verse of the sixteenth chapter of Mark states that these
signs did follow the believers in the days of Christ's early apostles.
These signs are outward evidences that people are true believers in the
Gospel. The absence of them is a proof that faith is lacking, for the
same cause will always produce the same effect.

OTHER PROOFS.

If a person truly believes in the Gospel, sincerely repents of his
sins, is baptized for the remission of sins, and has hands laid upon
him for the reception of the Holy Ghost, he should know that he has
received the true Gospel.

    "Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his
    that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
    doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself."
    (John 7: 16, 17).

OFFICE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

The Holy Ghost was promised to those who obeyed the Gospel. To all who
receive it, it bears witness to the truth of the Gospel.

    "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
    Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father,
    he shall testify of me." (John 15: 26).

    "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you
    into all truth." (John 16: 13).

If people receive the Holy Ghost they will be led into all truth,
according to the promise of Christ. If they are led into all truth they
will be led to understand and believe alike.

HOW THE SAVIOR'S DISCIPLES MAY BE KNOWN.

Jesus told how His disciples may be known:

    "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as
    I have loved you that ye also love one another. By this shall all
    men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another."
    (John 13: 34, 35).

When people are divided in their religious views it shows that they do
not love each other, and are not the disciples of Christ. If they did
love each other they would be united. If they possessed the Holy Spirit
they would be joined together in love.

{206}

    "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
    gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Galatians 5:
    22, 23).

THE CHURCH JESUS ORGANIZED.

When Jesus dwelt upon the earth He organized a church. Those who
believed on Him and obeyed the Gospel became members of that one church.

ST. PAUL DESCRIBES IT.

The Apostle Paul told the Ephesian saints they were established upon
the foundation of apostles and prophets.

    "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but
    fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and
    are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus
    Christ himself being the chief corner stone." (Ephesians 2: 19, 20).

He had reference in these words to the church of Christ.

THE CHURCH COMPARED TO A MAN'S BODY.

He again likened the church to the body of a man. (I Corinthians 12).
He showed that the members of the church were like the members of a
man's body, and altogether they made a complete whole.

    "For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members
    of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. For
    by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
    or Gentiles." (I Corinthians 12: 12, 13).

St. Paul continues by explaining that all the members of the body of
Christ, or officers of the church of Christ, are dependent upon each
other, and each is needed in his place. One cannot do without the
other, any more than a man's body can be complete without every limb
and organ.

OFFICERS NAMED.

This same apostle names some of the officers of the church of Christ.
He also names in the same connection some of the gifts that are always
to be found in that church.

    "And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily
    prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts
    of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues." (I
    Corinthians 12: 28).

WHAT THESE OFFICERS WERE FOR.

In another place he tells the reason for having these officers in the
church.

    {297} "For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
    ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. . . . That we
    henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
    about with every wind of doctrine." (Ephesians 4: 12, 14).

These officers were to continue in the church, "till we all come to the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God." (Eph. 4:
13).

NEED OF APOSTLES AND PROPHETS.

People differ in their opinions regarding the Gospel. There is,
therefore, a need of apostles and prophets to declare the word of God
to them. His revealed word will settle all differences and bring those
who believe on it to a unity of the faith.

WHAT ST. PAUL'S WORDS PROVE.

The scriptures just quoted prove that apostles and prophets must always
be in the church of Christ. Any church not founded upon apostles and
prophets, with Christ as the chief corner stone, is not the true church
of Christ. Any religious organization that rejects these and the other
officers mentioned as belonging to Christ's church, or does away with
the miracles, gifts of healing, helps, governments, and diversities of
tongues, is not the true church.

POWER TO DO MIRACLES.

When Jesus called unto Him twelve apostles He "gave them power against
unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness
and all manner of disease." (Matthew 10: 1). When He sent them out to
preach the Gospel, He told them to say, "The kingdom of heaven is at
hand." He also told them to "Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise
the dead, cast out devils." (Matthew 10: 7, 8).

AUTHORITY TO ACT IN CHRIST'S NAME.

Men have no right to choose for themselves to be Christ's apostles or
ministers of His Gospel. He said to His disciples,

    "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you."
    (John 15: 16).

St. Paul says concerning the holy priesthood of Christ,

    "No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of
    God, as was Aaron." (Hebrews 5: 4).

{298} He also says, "God hath set some in the church, first apostles,
secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers." (I Corinthians 12: 28). This
shows that it was not man's right to place men in positions in the
church, unless God authorized them to do so.

Jesus said John the Baptist was the greatest of prophets, yet he did
not presume to baptize with the Holy Ghost, although he had the right
to baptize with water. John understood that men should be specially
authorized to act in any calling.

RESULT OF ACTING WITHOUT AUTHORITY.

We read in the scriptures, (Acts 1: 13-17), that certain Jews at one
time undertook to act in the name of the Lord. They tried to cast out
evil spirits. But they had no authority, and were overpowered by the
evil spirits, and duly punished for taking upon themselves to act in
the name of the Messiah without authority.

CONCLUSIONS DRAWN FROM PASSAGES MENTIONED.

From the scriptures mentioned, together with many others of like
character, we may conclude that Christ's true apostles have power over
unclean spirits and over diseases. They also have authority to act in
His name. We can as well conclude that those who think it unnecessary
to be authorized to minister in the ordinances of the Gospel are in
error. Men may without authority attempt to teach the same doctrines as
Jesus taught; they may organize a church after the same pattern; and
some may even perform miracles by the power of the evil one, as did the
magicians before Pharaoh in the days of Moses; but without authority
from heaven to do so their pretensions are vain. We may justly reject
any who may have a form of godliness but deny the power thereof.

ALL TRUE DISCIPLES PERSECUTED.

The disciples of Christ were told that they would have to suffer
persecution. The Savior informed them that this should be the case, and
led them to expect it.

    "If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because
    ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
    therefore the world hateth you. . . If they have persecuted me,
    they will also persecute you." (John 15: 19, 20).

    "Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you: for so did
    their fathers to the false prophets." (Luke 6: 26).

{299} The Apostle Paul says, "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution." (II Timothy 3: 12).

OUTWARD SIGNS OF THE TRUE CHURCH.

Most of the marks pointed out herein are outward signs by which the
true Gospel and church of Christ may be known. The disciples of Jesus
may always be recognized by the following signs which have already been
pointed out:

They will Obey and Teach the Ordinances that Christ has said Must be
Obeyed.

Those Ordinances are:

First, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ;

Second, Repentance;

Third, Baptism by Immersion for the Remission of Sins;

Fourth, Laying on of Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

They will Teach the Necessity of Obeying all the Lord's Commandments.

The Signs or Blessings Promised the Believers will Follow them,

They will be United, and will Love one Another.

They will be Organized into a Church after the Pattern Mentioned in the
Scriptures.

They will have Apostles and Prophets at their Head, who will have Power
and Authority to Act in Christ's Name.

They will be Persecuted as Long as Wickedness Reigns in the Earth.

FAITH NEEDED.

The pointing out of the marks by which the disciples of Christ are
to be known may assist one in searching for the truth. But faith on
the part of the individual himself is needed to guide him. It is very
important to salvation.

HOW TO GET FAITH.

The question may be asked, how can this faith so necessary to salvation
be gained?

    "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Romans
    10: 17).

When one hears the Gospel of Christ--the "glad tidings of {300} great
joy"--naturally he should wish it were true, because it is so good.
That wish or desire will help greatly to awaken belief in his mind.
When a person hopes a thing is true he becomes interested in finding
out if it be true. Prejudice is a foe to faith. It often causes one to
turn away from that which is good.

KNOWLEDGE OF THE GOSPEL NECESSARY TO SALVATION.

It is necessary for every individual to know for himself concerning the
truth of the Gospel of Christ.

    "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
    and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17: 3).

There is a way to get this knowledge. That way is similar to the way in
which we obtain other knowledge. It is by putting works with our faith.

    "Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments."
    (I John 2: 3).

Faith comes by hearing, knowledge by doing. Knowledge is the result of
faith.

HOW KNOWLEDGE IS GAINED.

When a child is told that he can learn to read and write by following
the instructions of his teacher he is likely to believe it. If he is
told so by his parents or some one whose word he can rely upon he will
believe with much assurance or confidence, which is called faith. That
faith causes him to act. He follows the instructions of his teacher,
and in time learns to read and write. His faith is then turned to
knowledge. He does not depend upon the testimony of some one else. He
knows from actual experience that the arts of reading and writing can
be learned by taking the course marked out. It is the same with the
Gospel. When it is obeyed it brings knowledge to the individual.

GROWTH OF FAITH ILLUSTRATED BY A PARABLE.

One of our Savior's parables shows very beautifully how the word of
God, when received in the heart, begins to grow and expand. In His
parable of the sower He likens the word of God, or the Gospel, to
a seed. (Luke 8: 5-16). Embodied within a tiny seed is the germ or
source of a most marvelous power. It is one of the greatest forces of
the natural world. Under proper conditions that little mite of matter
is capable of the most remarkable development. When {301} a gardener
obtains a precious kind of seed, or one that will produce a desirable
fruit, he will preserve it with care. He will thoroughly prepare the
soil in which he plants it, and will do all in his power to favor its
growth. The desire to receive the good fruit he has been told it will
produce makes him hope that the seed is good. That hope or wish will
inspire him with enough faith to make the test.

In due time after planting he finds that the seed has commenced to
grow. It puts forth tiny leaves that appear above the soil, and his
faith is strengthened. He is assured that the seed had the germ of
life within it when he received it. He continues to favor its growth,
by keeping down the weeds, by protecting it from the scorching heat
of the sun and the blighting breath of the wind and frost. By doing
this the gardener sees that the plant continues to increase in size
and strength. Thread-like roots spread out in all directions beneath
the soil to secure hold therein, as well as to procure sustenance for
its life and growth A tender twig shoots upward to receive additional
sustenance from the air and the sunlight. Day by day and year by
year the plant continues to grow and gain strength, until eventually
it becomes a mighty tree. The heat of the sun now only causes it to
grow the stronger, and the fierce winds to make its root more firmly
planted, so that no ordinary force can resist its power of expansion.

In due season the tree produces fruit of its kind. Its seeds ripen
and fall to the earth, and they in turn grow, and thus the species is
perpetuated forever.

With the ripening of the fruit the faith of the man who planted the
tree is ripened into perfect knowledge. He knows what was told him
about the seed was true, having thoroughly tested it.

WORD OF GOD LIKE A SEED.

The word of God, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ, is in character like
the seed. As the seed contains within it such great physical force,
so the word of God possesses most wonderful spiritual power. When the
Gospel of Christ is heard by one who has a desire to obtain its fruits,
that desire will awaken within him a spark of belief. That belief will
cause him to prepare his heart for the reception of the word of God. He
will plant it there by seeking to obey its teachings. When once planted
there, if cherished, shielded and protected it will grow. Its effect
will be similar to that of {302} the seed buried in good soil. Its
roots of faith will sink deep in the heart and become firmly planted
there. Hope, like a tender twig, will spring heavenward. By this the
person will know that the seed was good Day by day and year by year it
will strengthen, until neither the heat of temptation nor the storms
of adversity can disturb it or uproot it from the heart. It, too, in
time will bring forth fruit, the fruit of eternal life. Such is the
wonderful character of the word of God, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

WHERE IS THE TRUE GOSPEL AND CHURCH OF CHRIST?

The reader may ask the question, Is the Gospel of Christ, with all its
attendant powers, gifts and blessings, upon the earth to-day? If it is,
it must be of the character described herein. It must be the same as it
was anciently, for it is everlasting and unchangeable in its nature.

IT IS UPON THE EARTH.

There is a church that claims to teach the very same doctrines that
Christ taught. Its members claim to enjoy the same blessings promised
the believers. They claim to have the same organization, with living
apostles and prophets at the head. These officers claim to have
received the same power and authority as Christ's first apostles had.
They and their followers have been evil spoken of and persecuted for
their religion ever since they were first organized as a church. They
manifest all the outward signs by which the followers of Christ may be
known. They make the same promises as the former disciples of Jesus
made to those who obey the Gospel. The many thousands who have accepted
their teachings and obeyed them testify that the promises made to them
have been received.

THEIR CLAIMS DIFFERENT TO ALL OTHERS.

The claims of the members of this Church are different from those of
all other professors of religion. They claim to have received their
doctrines and their authority direct from heaven, by the visitation of
holy angels. There is no other source from which it could be received.
The name by which this Church is known is the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. The Lord in a revelation commanded His latter-day
disciples to take upon themselves this name.

The message of the restoration to earth of the true Gospel of Christ
is a glorious one. All who hear it should rejoice in {303} the
contemplation that the Lord has again spoken from heaven. The message
is such a good one that all mankind should desire and hope that it is
true. If they will do this, they will be led to investigate it. Then
they will learn for themselves that it is indeed the Gospel of Christ.

The Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, bear
witness to the truth of this divine message which they are proclaiming
to the nations of the earth. They kindly ask all to lay aside prejudice
and examine their claims in the spirit of humility and prayer.

    "_Do you suppose that this people will ever see the day that they
    will rest in perfect security, in hopes of becoming like another
    people, nation, state, kingdom or society? They never will. Christ
    and Satan never can be friends. Light and darkness will always
    remain opposites_."

    --_Brigham Young_.

    "_Though our religious principles are before the world, ready
    for the investigation of all men, yet we are aware that the
    sole foundation of all the persecution against us has arisen in
    consequence of calumnies and misconstructions, without foundation
    in truth or righteousness_."

    --_Joseph Smith_.

{304}



SIGNS OF CHRIST'S SECOND COMING.

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS CONCERNING HIS ADVENT.

BY ELDER EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.

WHAT THE SAVIOR AND HIS APOSTLES AND THE ANCIENT PROPHETS SAY
CONCERNING IT--THE MANY THINGS TO TAKE PLACE BEFORE THAT GREAT
EVENT--THE SIGNS ALREADY APPEARING.

SCRIPTURAL PROOF THAT HE WILL COME.

The holy scriptures supply many proofs that Christ will again come to
earth. After His resurrection He appeared to His disciples, and was
"seen of them forty days." Then "he was taken up; and a cloud received
him out of their sight." While the disciples were looking towards
heaven as He went up, two men (angels) in white apparel stood by them
and said:

    "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same
    Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in
    like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1: 11).

MANNER OF HIS APPEARANCE.

Christ's second coming will be both glorious and terrible.

    "They shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with
    power and great glory." (Matthew 24: 30; Mark 13: 26; Luke 21: 27).

    "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his
    angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works."
    (Matthew 16: 27; Mark 8: 38).

    "And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
    shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming
    fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
    the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with
    everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
    glory of his power." (II Thessalonians 1: 7, 8, 9).

TIME OF HIS COMING.

The day and the hour of the Messiah's coming is not known.

    "But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
    {305} which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. Take ye
    heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is." (Mark 13:
    32, 33).

MANY SIGNS OF HIS COMING TO APPEAR.

The Bible foretells many things that shall take place before the Savior
comes to reign in glory upon the earth.

WARS, FAMINES AND EARTHQUAKES.

Christ's disciples asked Him to tell them what should be the sign of
His coming, and of the end of the world. He answered them in these
words:

    "Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my name,
    saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many. And ye shall hear of
    wars and rumors of wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all these
    things must come to pass, but the end is not yet. For nation shall
    rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall
    be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places."
    (Matthew 24: 4, 5, 6, 7).

GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM TO BE PREACHED.

In addition to this he mentioned another sign. He said:

    "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world
    for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come."
    (Matthew 24: 14).

These words have no reference to the ministry of Christ's former
disciples. The end of the world, or the end of the reign of wickedness,
did not follow their preaching. The Savior certainly referred to a
time in the future. He spoke of a special message of the Gospel of the
kingdom to be restored in latter days, otherwise the preaching of it
would not be a witness or sign to all nations of the near approaching
end, as He said it should be.

JOHN'S PROPHECY.

The beloved Apostle John, in the book of Revelation, foretells many
things that should take place after the time of his writings. One thing
he describes in these words:

    "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
    everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
    to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with
    a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his
    judgment is come." (Revelation 14: 6, 7).

John evidently refers to the same event as does the Savior. The coming
of an angel with the Gospel message for all nations, as predicted by
John, should be in the hour of God's {306} judgment. That is at the
same time referred to by Jesus, when He said wars and rumors of wars,
famines, pestilences, and earthquakes should occur; for these things
are some of God's judgments.

PREDICTIONS OF DANIEL.

The Prophet Daniel also foretells a similar event, which he says,
"_shall be in the latter days_." After describing the image
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, Daniel explains the meaning of it. He
says the image represented Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom and the kingdoms
that should be built up after it. The fourth great kingdom--the Roman
power--should be divided, and a number of kingdoms should grow out of
it. Then he declares a wonderful event shall take place. He says:

    "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
    kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not
    be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume
    all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever." (Daniel 2: 44).

WHAT DANIEL REFERS TO.

Some may think this prophecy refers to the establishing of the kingdom
of heaven on earth in the days of Christ's first coming. This cannot
be the case. God's kingdom at that time did not "break in pieces and
consume" the one great kingdom then existing--the Roman empire. On the
other hand the worldly powers, which St. John describes as a "beast,"
made "war with the saints," and overcame them, and got power over all
kindreds, and tongues and nations. (Revelation 13: 7).

The kingdom referred to by Daniel, as he plainly says "_shall not_ be
left to other people," while the Gospel of the kingdom in the days of
Christ's former Apostles was rejected by the Jews and _left to other
people_. It was taken to the Gentiles.

CONCLUSIONS DRAWN FROM THESE PREDICTIONS.

The Apostle John, in speaking of the great event of the future, says he
heard voices in heaven saying--

    "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
    Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever."
    (Revelation 11: 15).

This is also in harmony with Daniel's prediction about the kingdom of
God being set up in the latter days.

{307} As all these prophecies so nicely agree, we are forced to the
conclusion that the Gospel of Christ is to be preached in all the world
in latter days as a witness, or sign, of the coming of the Messiah and
the establishment of His kingdom.

GOD'S ELECT TO BE GATHERED.

Other significant events should precede the Savior's second coming. He
mentions them also:

    "But in those days, after the tribulation, the sun shall be
    darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars
    of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be
    shaken. . . . . . And then shall he send his angels, and shall
    gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost
    part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven." (Mark 13: 24,
    25, 27; Matthew 24: 29, 31).

St. Luke adds that there shall be "upon the earth distress of nations,
with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; men's hearts failing
them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on
the earth." (Luke 21: 25, 26).

That all these things shall be signs of His coming is to be understood
from what the Savior adds:

    "When ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at
    the doors." (Matthew 24: 33; Mark 13: 29; Luke 21: 31).

ANCIENT PROPHECIES CONCERNING THE LAST DAYS.

More than twenty of the ancient prophets and apostles whose writings
are in the Bible predict events that shall happen in the last days,
or near the time of Christ's second coming. Many of them prophesy
concerning the gathering of the Lord's chosen people, the descendants
of Israel. They not only foretell the gathering of the Jews but also
the whole house of Israel. Some of the other tribes as well as that
of Judah are scattered among all nations. The Prophet Jeremiah says
concerning this gathering:

    "Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall
    no more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of
    Israel out of the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, that brought
    up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all
    the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again
    into their land that I gave unto their fathers. Behold, I will send
    for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and
    after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from
    every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the
    rocks." (Jeremiah 16: 14, 15, 16).

{308} The Prophet Isaiah says:

    "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set
    his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his
    people. . . . . And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and
    shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
    dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth." (Isaiah 11:
    11, 12).

The Prophets Isaiah and Micah declare:

    "It shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the
    Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
    shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto
    it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to
    the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and
    he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for
    out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
    Jerusalem." (Isaiah 2: 2, 3; Micah 4: 1, 2).

GATHERING OF ISRAEL A SIGN OF CHRIST'S COMING.

From what the prophets have said it is evident that this gathering of
Israel shall be connected with Christ's reign upon earth, and will
therefore be a sign of His coming. The Prophet Ezekiel predicts that
Israel shall be gathered, and in the same connection declares the word
of the Lord, saying:

    "I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in
    the midst of them forever." (Ezekiel 37: 26).

The setting of the Lord's sanctuary in the midst of them forever must
have reference to the establishing of His kingdom never more to be
thrown down.

In connection with this gathering Isaiah speaks of a time when enmity
among the animal creations shall cease, and when "the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea,"
(Isaiah 11: 9), indicating that the gathering will be near the time
when peace and righteousness shall prevail upon the earth.

SIGNS FOLLOWING THE BELIEVERS.

That the blessings of the Gospel, which were in the church in the days
of Christ and His apostles, will be restored at the time when the
gathering of Israel shall take place is shown by what Isaiah foretells:

    "Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the
    deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart,
    and the tongue of the dumb sing." (Isaiah 35: 5, 6).

A MESSENGER TO APPEAR.

There is still another sign to mark the coming of the {309} Messiah.
The whole volume of sacred scripture gives proof that it will be
manifest.

The Prophet Malachi, repeating the Lord's words to him concerning His
coming in glory, says:

    "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way
    before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his
    temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in:
    behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts." (Malachi 3: 1).

The following verse shows that this prophecy does not refer to Christ's
first coming:

    "But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when
    he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's
    soap." (Malachi 3: 2).

It appears from this prediction of Malachi that the Lord will send a
messenger to prepare the way for His second coming, as was done at the
time of His first coming. It is reasonable to believe this, for it is
in full harmony with the teachings of the scriptures. The Prophet Amos
says:

    "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret
    unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3: 7).

ABUNDANCE OF SCRIPTURE TO PROVE IT.

The whole Bible history bears witness to the truth of these words of
Amos. It is a record of God's dealings with mankind through the agency
of "his servants the prophets," The sacred book tells us nothing
concerning the things of God but what has been revealed by His holy
prophets. In connection with all important events it relates, we
read of some inspired men appearing. These prophets were raised up
to deliver special messages from the Lord direct to the people. From
time to time the Lord has such messages to declare to mankind. In all
past ages He has proclaimed them by the mouths of His prophets. The
Lord spoke to these men with His own voice, sometimes face to face,
sometimes from the midst of a cloud or from a burning bush, and at
other times by a voice from heaven.

Before the Lord destroyed the inhabitants of the earth with a flood, He
raised up the Prophet Noah to warn the people of the danger they were
in, and to point out to them a way of escape.

When the Lord was about to raise up a chosen people of the posterity of
Abraham, He told that patriarch of His intention. {310} He also renewed
the promise to Jacob, by speaking unto him, and Jacob prophesied
concerning his posterity.

After the children of Israel became slaves to the Egyptians, and when
the Lord was about to free them, He revealed His intentions to the
Prophet Moses. He chose this man to prepare the people for deliverance
and to lead them out of Egypt.

When the Jews were about to be taken captives by the Babylonians,
prophets were sent to warn them of their danger. Jeremiah and Ezekiel
were two of those prophets. The people heeded not their warning, and
many were slain or taken as prisoners.

When the Lord was about to destroy Nineveh, unless the people repented
of their sins, He sent the Prophet Jonah to call them to repentance.
The people listened to and obeyed his words and were saved.

When the Jewish kingdom was about to be entirely overthrown for the
last time, John the Baptist and the Savior Himself appeared to point
out the way for the people's salvation; but they were rejected by the
great majority.

THE FUTURE DETERMINED BY THE PAST.

Jesus says about His second advent:

    "But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son
    of man be." (Matthew 24: 37).

As Noah was sent to warn the people of the approaching flood in his
day, is it not reasonable to expect that a prophet will be sent in the
latter days to warn the people of the destruction of the wicked, when
the Savior comes to take vengeance upon them?

The Bible fully establishes the fact that all important things done by
the Lord in past ages have been preceded by the appearance of inspired
prophets. Surely the greatest event of the world's history--Christ's
glorious reign on earth--will be preceded by the appearance of divinely
inspired messengers!

SIGNS ENUMERATED.

Scriptural testimony has been presented in the foregoing to show that a
number of signs of Christ's second coming will be made manifest to the
world before His appearance takes place:

There will be Wars and Rumors of Wars, Famines, and Pestilences, and
Earthquakes.

{311} The Gospel of the Kingdom shall be Preached in all the World for
a Witness unto all Nations.

The Sun and Moon shall be darkened, the Stars of Heaven shall Fall, and
the Powers of Heaven shall be Shaken.

The Lord's Chosen People will be Gathered.

The House of the Lord shall be established in the Top of the Mountains.

All the Gifts and Blessings of the Gospel shall be Restored.

A Messenger shall Come to Prepare the Way Before the Lord.

APPEARANCE OF THE SIGNS.

The order in which these signs will appear is not clearly stated in the
scriptures. It is consistent to believe that several will be apparent
at once. Famines and pestilences often occur as the results of war.

The preaching of the Gospel and the gathering of the Lord's elect will
take time, and may proceed together. It is plainly evident that before
the preaching or the gathering the Lord's authorized messenger must
appear to begin the work and to show how the Lord desires it carried
out.

SIGNS ALREADY APPARENT.

The "wars and rumors of wars," the rising of "kingdom against kingdom,"
the "distress of nations," and the "famines, pestilences, and
earthquakes" of the present time proclaim that THE COMING OF THE LORD
"IS NEAR, EVEN AT THE DOORS." The desire awakened among the Jews to
return to Jerusalem, and the efforts being made for them to do so, are
also witnesses that THE TIME OF THEIR "REDEMPTION DRAWETH NIGH."

WHO BELIEVES THESE THINGS.

But what about the messenger to prepare the way before the Lord? How
about the preaching of the Gospel of the kingdom in all the world?
Where are the gifts and blessings of the Gospel--the signs to follow
the believers? Where are the chosen people being gathered? And where is
the house of the Lord being established?

In this age of unbelief who is looking for the fulfillment of these
important events which must surely come to pass? Well might the Savior
ask the question: "When the Son of {312} Man Cometh, shall he find
faith on the earth?" "As the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming
of the Son of man be." There were but few believers in Noah's day.

A PEOPLE PREPARING FOR CHRIST'S COMING.

The Latter-day Saints claim that the divinely inspired messenger has
come to prepare the way before the Lord. They know that the gifts,
powers and blessings of the Gospel have been restored, for they are
partakers of them. Among them the eyes of the blind have been opened,
the ears of the deaf unstopped, and the lame healed. Their missionaries
in a humble way have been proclaiming the Gospel of the kingdom for
over sixty years; and thousands of them are among the nations of
the earth declaring it at the present time. Many of those who have
believed their message have been gathered out from all nations, "from
the four winds," from the "islands of the sea," from the "mountains"
and "hills," and the "holes of the rocks." They have built the Lord's
house in "the top of the mountains," where "all nations shall flow unto
it," as they are now doing. There they are being taught the Lord's
ways, that they might more fully "walk in His paths." The claims of the
Latter-day Saints are worthy of the earnest and prayerful consideration
of all who are seeking to prepare for the coming of the Lord.

    "_We have turned the barren, bleak prairies and swamps into
    beautiful towns, farms and cities, by our industry; and the men
    who seek our destruction and cry thief, treason, riot, are those
    who themselves violate the laws, steal and plunder from their
    neighbors, and seek to destroy the innocent, heralding forth lies
    to screen themselves from the just punishment of their crimes by
    bringing destruction upon innocent people_."

    --_Joseph Smith_.

{313}



SAVED BY GRACE THROUGH OBEDIENCE.

IMPORTANT QUESTIONS CONCERNING SALVATION ANSWERED BY THE WORD OF GOD.
EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL ENGLAND.

BIBLE TEACHINGS UPON THIS SUBJECT--IMPORTANT QUESTIONS CONCERNING
SALVATION ANSWERED BY THE WORD OF GOD SALVATION FREE TO ALL WHO WILL
OBEY--FAITH ALONE WILL NOT SAVE--TRUE FAITH CANNOT BE SEPARATED FROM
WORKS OF OBEDIENCE--ILLUSTRATIONS OF SALVATION BY GRACE.

IS SALVATION FREE TO ALL?

The Bible plainly says that it is. St. Paul tells us that our Savior
"Will have all men to be saved." (I Timothy 3: 4). John tells us that

    "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
    whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
    life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world;
    but that the world through him might be saved." (John 3: 16, 17).

ARE ALL MEN SINNERS?

The Bible says so.

    "There is none righteous, no, not one." (Romans 3: 10).

    "For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and
    sinneth not." (Ecclesiastes 7: 20).

    "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
    is not in us." (I John 1: 8).

WHAT IS THE LORD'S INVITATION AND PROMISE TO SINNERS?

He invites them to come unto Him, and promises them rest unto their
souls and forgiveness of their sins.

    "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
    {314} give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I
    am meek and lowly of heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
    For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11: 28-30).

    "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your
    sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be
    red like crimson, they shall be as wool." (Isaiah 1: 18).

CAN SINFUL MAN SAVE HIMSELF?

No. The Apostle Paul says salvation "is the gift of God," (Ephesians 2:
8); he also says,

    "The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life."
    (Romans 6: 23).

THEN BY WHAT MEANS CAN MAN BE SAVED?

Only through the grace of God, which means by His goodness, favor, or
kindness.

    "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of
    yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man
    should boast." (Ephesians 2: 8, 9).

DOES THIS MEAN THAT WE ARE TO DO NOTHING?

Certainly not, for the next verse of St. Paul's writing states that we
must perform good works.

    "For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
    works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them."
    (Ephesians 2: 10).

WHAT IS THIS GIFT OF GOD WHICH BRINGS SALVATION TO MAN?

It is the atonement made by Jesus Christ, by which He took away the sin
of the world.

    "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the
    unjust, that he might bring us to God." (I Peter 3: 18).

    "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world."
    (John 1: 29).

FROM WHAT IS MAN SAVED BY CHRIST'S ATONEMENT?

First, from the effects of Adam's fall, which is death.

    "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of
    the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
    made alive." (I Corinthians 15: 21, 22).

Second, from the sins man himself commits, provided he accepts the
grace which Christ offers.

    {315} "And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours
    only, but also for the sins of the whole world." (I John 2: 2).

HOW CAN MAN RECEIVE THE GREAT GIFT OF SALVATION FROM SIN?

Only by obeying the Gospel of Jesus Christ; that is, by doing what He
has commanded. There is no other way. St. Paul says of Christ:

    "Being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto
    all them that obey him." (Hebrews 5: 9).

The Savior Himself says:

    "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
    kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my father which is
    in heaven." (Matthew 7: 21).

    "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14: 15).

    "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that
    loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I
    will love him, and will manifest myself to him." (John 14: 21).

SHALL WE BE JUDGED ACCORDING TO OUR BELIEF OR ACCORDING TO OUR
OBEDIENCE?

The scriptures tell us that every man will be rewarded according to his
works.

    "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his
    angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works."
    (Matthew 16, 27).

    "Who will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who
    by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and
    immortality, eternal life: but unto them that are contentious, and
    do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and
    wrath." (Romans 2: 6, 7).

    "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the
    books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book
    of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were
    written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up
    the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead
    which were in them: and they were judged every man according to
    their works. (Revelation 20: 12, 13).

WHAT WILL BE THE PENALTY OF DISOBEDIENCE?

The Apostle Paul says the Lord Jesus will take vengeance upon those who
obey not the Gospel of Christ.

    "And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
    shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming
    fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
    the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ." (II Thessalonians 1: 7, 8).

{316} The Apostle James says people deceive themselves if they do not
the things the Lord commands:

    "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
    selves." (James 1: 22).

    "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith,
    and have not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be
    naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them,
    Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give
    them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it
    profit?" (James 2: 14, 15, 16).

The Apostle John gives this testimony concerning those who obey the
Lord:

    "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
    right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into
    the city." (Revelation 22: 14).

ARE NOT MANKIND CLEANSED FROM SIN BY THE BLOOD OF JESUS?

Yes, if they follow Him, that is, keep His commandments.

    "This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
    unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If
    we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we
    lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as he is in
    the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
    Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." (I John 1: 5, 6,
    7).

#DOES THE OBEDIENCE WHICH THE LORD REQUIRES MEAN BELIEF ONLY?

No; for true belief, or faith, cannot be separated from works. Jesus
says,

    "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also."
    (John 14: 12).

    "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
    kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is
    in heaven." (Matthew 7: 21).

    "And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
    say?" (Luke 6: 46).

    "Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you." (John 15:
    14).

The Apostle James also tells us,

    "Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone." (James
    2: 17).

Knowing that a man cannot show that he has faith except by his works,
this Apostle adds:

    "Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith
    by my works." (James 2: 18).

{317} To make it plain that a belief without works is not a living
faith and will not save, he says,

    "The devils also believe and tremble." (James 2: 19).

WHAT WORKS ARE REQUIRED WITH OUR FAITH?

The ordinances of the Gospel, such as repentance, baptism and the
laying on of hands, and all the works of righteousness God has
commanded. Jesus says concerning repentance and baptism,

    "Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matthew 4: 17).

    "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." (Luke 13: 5).

    "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." (Mark 16: 16).

The Apostle Peter says,

    "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
    Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
    the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2: 38).

In regard to works of righteousness Christ says:

    "Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the
    scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom
    of heaven." (Matthew 5: 20).

    "He that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matthew 10: 22).

Upon this subject the Apostle Peter writes:

    "Add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to
    knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience
    godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
    kindness charity." (II Peter 1: 5-7).

DOES ANY PART OF THE BIBLE TEACH THAT MAN CAN BE SAVED WITHOUT
WORKS?

No. The passages that some people suppose teach such a doctrine are not
fully understood by them. Paul and Silas said to the jailer, when he
asked them what he should do to be saved,

    "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved and thy
    house." (Acts 16: 31).

They knew that the jailer could not truly believe without obeying. That
he did obey is shown by the words that follow:

    "And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their
    stripes; and was baptized, he and all his, straightway." (Acts 16:
    33).

On the day of Pentecost the Apostle Peter repeated these words from the
prophecy of Joel:

{318}

    "And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name
    of the Lord shall be saved." (Acts 2: 21).

But on the same occasion he commanded every one of them to repent and
be baptized. (Acts 2: 38).

St. Paul says,

    "A man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law." (Romans
    3: 28).

It is made plain by other remarks which he makes in the same connection
that he refers to the Jewish law, and not to deeds of righteousness,
nor Gospel ordinances. In no place does the Bible teach that faith
without works will save.

AN ILLUSTRATION.

Suppose a farmer were told these words by a friend: "If you only
had a horse, you might do much more work." The farmer would at once
understand that his friend meant that he should not only procure a
horse, but that he should feed it, and use it in the harness in order
to get the work performed. He would be considered a very foolish man if
he merely bought the horse, and never fed it or used it, simply because
his friend did not say the words "You must feed it and make use of it
after you get it." The horse would soon die, and then be of no use to
the owner if he treated it in such a way. Anyone who says he believes
in Jesus Christ and never obeys His commandments has but a dead faith,
which is of no more use to him than is a dead horse to a farmer.

WHAT KNOWLEDGE DOES THE BIBLE SAY IS NECESSARY TO ETERNAL LIFE?

A knowledge of our Father in heaven, and our Redeemer.

    "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
    and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17: 3).

CAN THIS KNOWLEDGE BE OBTAINED WITHOUT OBEDIENCE TO THE
COMMANDMENTS OF THE LORD?

It cannot. The Apostle John says:

    "Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandment.
    He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a
    liar, and the truth is not in him." (I John 2: 3, 4).

{319}

CAN THERE BE MORE THAN ONE WAY OF SALVATION, OR MORE THAN ONE TRUE
GOSPEL AND CHURCH OF CHRIST?

No. The Savior taught only one way, and organized but one church. He
says:

    "I am the way, the truth and the life: no man cometh unto the
    Father, but by me." (John 14: 6).

    "He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth
    up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber." (John 10: 1).

St. Paul says concerning the one Gospel of Christ:

    "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
    unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
    accursed." (Galatians 1: 8).

The same Apostle says concerning the Church of Christ:

    "There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
    hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism." (Ephesians
    4: 4, 5).

St. John gives this warning against those who teach not the necessity
of abiding in Christ, that is obeying all His doctrines:

    "If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
    him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that
    biddeth him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds." (II John 10,
    11).

IF ORDINANCES AND COMMANDMENTS MUST BE OBEYED HOW ARE MANKIND SAVED
BY GRACE, WHICH IS A FREE GIFT?

The Gospel plan is given through the grace of God. It is a gift to man.
If man refuses to obey it he rejects the gift, which is the only means
of his salvation.

    "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of
    God unto salvation to every one that believeth." (Romans 1: 16).

TRUTHS DECLARED BY THE WORD OF GOD.

The passages already given are from the writings and sayings of
divinely inspired apostles and prophets. They are the words of God, for
these men "spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." With many other
passages in the Bible they prove that--

Salvation is Free to all. All men are Sinners.

{320} The Lord Invites all Sinners to come to Him, and Promises them
Forgiveness.

Sinful man Cannot save Himself.

He can only be Saved by the Grace of God.

He can only partake of the Full Grace of God by Obeying the Gospel of
Christ.

Obedience means to Keep the Commandments as well as to Believe.

The Bible Teaches no other way of Salvation.

SALVATION AND EDUCATION.

The Gospel which redeems from sin may be likened unto a course of
education which redeems from ignorance. The two are so near alike
that if we understand the one we may be able to understand the other.
Sometimes wealthy men establish schools that are free to the public.
All who desire to get an education are invited to receive it freely.
It might be said that it is by the grace or kindness of these men that
those who accept their offer are educated. But to receive the education
they offer so freely one must comply with the rules of the school.
He cannot enter unless he is willing to do so. After he has entered
the pupil must obey the instructions given or he never will gain the
education offered, although it is offered freely.

Salvation in the kingdom of heaven is very much the same. It is offered
to all freely, but to receive it one must accept of the conditions
upon which it is tendered; and he must gain it by obedience to the
instructions of the Savior, who made salvation free to mankind.

SIN AND DEBT.

Sin may be likened unto a debt. Sometimes men get into debt and are
unable to pay what they owe. Suppose a man in this condition was told
by the man to whom he was in debt that he would be forgiven if he would
agree to certain conditions. Such a man would not expect forgiveness
unless he made the promise and kept his agreement.

All men are sinners before the Lord, and they cannot free themselves
from their sins. The Savior, however, promises them forgiveness on
condition of their obedience to His commandments. How then can we
expect to receive forgiveness unless we accept His offer and obey His
word?

{321}



THE BEGINNING OF THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST.

RULES THAT MUST BE OBEYED BY ALL WHO ENTER CHRIST'S CHURCH.

BY ELDER EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.

###WHAT IS SALVATION?

Salvation means redemption from eternal death, and deliverance from the
effects of sin. It is the gift of God to man.

    "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of
    yourselves: it is the gift of God." (Ephesians 2: 8).

Adam's transgression, or original sin, brought eternal death upon
mankind. The atonement made by the Savior made redemption from that
eternal death general or universal; that is, all will be redeemed from
it. Both good and bad will be resurrected.

    "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of
    the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
    made alive." (I Corinthians 15: 21, 22).

OUR OWN SINS.

Salvation from our own sins is a special blessing of our Heavenly
Father. It is offered freely, but all who desire it must accept it upon
the condition specified. That condition is obedience to the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

WHAT IS THE GOSPEL?

The Gospel of Jesus Christ is called the plan of salvation. It is a
system of rules by complying with which salvation may be gained; hence
it is called in the scriptures the "power of God unto salvation."

{322} There are many systems or branches of knowledge known to man,
such as that of music, of chemistry, of mathematics, of geometry, etc.
By learning and practicing the rules of one of these systems a person
can receive the benefits to be had from that particular system. By
learning and practicing the rules of the Gospel we can receive the
blessing it offers, which is salvation.

To enjoy the privileges and blessings of civilized society children
have to learn the rules or customs of civilized people. This they
do by obeying the teachings they receive from their parents. If an
uncivilized man wishes to associate with civilized people, and enjoy
their company, he must be willing to obey their teachings, or the rules
of their society. The Gospel of Jesus Christ leaches the rules of
conduct that are to be observed by all who are saved in the kingdom of
heaven. These rules are simple, but they are very strict. They must be
obeyed.

THE FIRST RULE--FAITH.

The first rule or principle of the Gospel is faith in God. The Apostle
Paul says:

    "Without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh
    to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
    that diligently seek him." (Hebrews 11: 6).

It is shown in the above passage that we cannot come to God without
believing that He exists, and also that He rewards them that diligently
seek Him. In order to believe that God rewards all that seek Him, we
must trust Him, or have confidence in His word. That is, we must rely
upon His promises. This is the full meaning of faith. The same apostle
gives this definition of faith:

    "Faith is the substance" [assurance] "of things hoped for, the
    evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11: 1).

The reason why it is impossible to please God without faith is because
He desires that His children should come unto Him, that they might be
saved. It pleases Him when they keep His commandments, while He is
displeased when they are disobedient.

NATURE OF TRUE FAITH.

True faith is sometimes called living faith. It is capable of growing.
When exercised it becomes stronger. When we {323} trust in the Lord we
prove to ourselves that He can be relied upon. We learn that His word
can be depended upon, and so our confidence in Him is increased. By
the continued exercise of faith in God it becomes a principle of great
power. Men by it have influence with the Lord. By it they are enabled
to do many marvelous things. Jesus says,

    "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that
    believeth." (Mark 9: 23).

    "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto
    this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove;
    and nothing shall be impossible unto you." (Matthew 17: 20).

    "What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye
    receive them, and ye shall have them." (Mark 11: 24).

POWER OF FAITH.

St. Paul mentions many great things done by the power of faith, and
speaks of a number of men of old "who through faith subdued kingdoms,
wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the
armies of the aliens." (Hebrew 11: 33, 34).

Knowing the great power of living faith, the Savior promised with
assurance that marvelous blessings should follow all who believe on the
Lord. These blessings, He said, should be signs or evidences of their
belief.

    "These signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they
    cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take
    up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
    them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover."
    (Mark 16: 17, 18).

All these blessings were enjoyed by believers in former days. They are
also received by true believers to-day. The result of faith is always
the same. If it was possible for miracles to be performed by the power
of faith in ancient times it is equally possible to do the same by
faith at the present time.

NECESSITY OF MIRACULOUS GIFTS.

It is necessary that the signs or gifts of the Gospel should follow
believers in our day as well as in past ages. They furnish a proof of
our faith. If our faith is not sufficient to bring to us the temporal
blessings of God which we need or desire, then we have cause to fear
that our faith is not strong enough to bring to us eternal salvation.
It is possible for a {324} person to be mistaken in estimating his own
faith. Sometimes people over-estimate their strength, and only learn
of their mistake when they make some test of it. Persons can also
overestimate the faith they possess, and if they do not test it they
may deceive themselves.

Faith, like bodily strength, can only be developed or increased by
exercising it; and a person once possessing faith may lose it by
disuse, as one loses his strength of muscle when it is not exercised.

EXISTENCE OF FAITH SHOWN BY WORKS.

True faith is always made manifest by works. When a person has faith in
the Lord he will show it by his works of obedience; that is by keeping
the commandments of God. It is useless for any one to profess that he
has faith, if he does not show it by his obedience. The Savior asks the
question,

    "Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?"
    (Luke 6: 46).

The Apostle James says we deceive ourselves if we are not doers of the
word:

    "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
    selves." (James 2: 22).

He further adds that it is not profitable to say we have faith and do
not perform works, and that the best way to show our faith is by our
works:

    "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith,
    and have not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be
    naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them,
    Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give
    them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it
    profit? Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone.
    Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works; shew me thy
    faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works.
    Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils
    also believe, and tremble." (James 2: 14-19).

ANOTHER EVIDENCE OF FAITH.

True faith can be recognized by another proof or test. When it is
obtained it causes its possessor to be very humble. It is always
accompanied with humility. It convinces its possessor that he is a
sinner, and he feels penitent.

THE SECOND RULE--REPENTANCE.

Repentance is the second rule or principle of the Gospel of Christ. It
naturally follows faith in God and Jesus Christ. True faith leads to
repentance of sin as one step up a ladder leads to the next.

{325}

MEANING OF REPENTANCE.

According to the teachings of the scriptures, to repent means to feel
sorrow for sins committed and to turn away from them; that is to do
them no more. St. Paul, in writing to the Corinthian saints, says to
them concerning their repentance:

    "Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed
    to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner that ye
    might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow worketh
    repentance to salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of
    the world worketh death." (II Corinthians 7: 9, 10).

The same apostle in exhorting the Ephesians to repent told them what
they should do, or how they should repent. He says,

    "Let him that stole steal no more." (Ephesians 4: 28).

One who sincerely repents will also seek to make restitution for wrongs
done. If he has stolen he will return, if possible, that which he has
taken. Such is the full meaning of repentance--to forsake sin.

NECESSITY OF REPENTANCE.

Repentance is very necessary to salvation in the kingdom of heaven.
Those who have been led to exercise faith in the Lord are under great
condemnation if they do not repent. They are in rebellion against Him
and cannot receive His approbation. Unless they turn from their sins
they are not fit subjects for His kingdom. Both John the Baptist and
Jesus began their labors in the ministry by calling upon the people to
repent.

    "In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness
    of Judea, and saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at
    hand." (Matthew 3: 1, 2).

    "From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the
    kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matthew 4: 17).

John refused to baptize those who came to him, without repenting, and
told them to bring forth "fruits meet for repentance." (Matthew 3: 7,
8).

Neither faith nor baptism will benefit a person unless he repents also.
The object of the Gospel is to bring mankind back to God. Through sin
they are separated from Him.

    "Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
    sins have hid his face from you." (Isaiah 59: 2).

{326}

To return to Him it is necessary to put away sin--to repent of it.

    "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
    God?" (I Corinthians 6: 9).

    "Except ye repent, ye shall likewise perish." (Luke 13: 3).

It is only upon certain conditions that the blood of Christ cleanseth
from all sin:

    "If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship
    one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth
    us from all sin." (I John 1: 7).

In order to "walk in the light" we must turn away from the dark paths
of sin.

THE THIRD RULE--BAPTISM.

Repentance alone does not remit sin, yet every one who is truly
penitent desires that his sins be remitted. It is through the atonement
of Jesus Christ that a remission of sins is obtained. To make that
atonement effective to each individual the Savior has instituted an
ordinance. By obeying that ordinance, after repenting of his sins, a
person can receive a remission or forgiveness of them.

TRUE MODE OF BAPTISM.

The ordinance for the remission of sins is called baptism. The meaning
of the word baptize is to immerse or dip. The only proper mode of
baptism is by immersion. All the baptisms described in the New
Testament were performed by immersion.

St. Matthew says concerning the baptism of Jesus:

    "And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the
    water." (Matthew 3: 16).

    This shows that He must have gone down into the water. "And John
    also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there was much
    water there." (John 3: 23).

This is also a proof that John baptized by immersion.

The baptism of the eunuch by Philip is described thus in the Bible:

    "They went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch;
    and he baptized him. And when they were come up out of the water,
    the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip." (Acts 8: 38, 39).

{327}

This, again, shows the manner of baptism practiced by the Savior's
disciples.

St. Paul writes:

    "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ
    were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by
    baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead
    by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness
    of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of
    his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection."
    (Romans 6: 3, 4, 5).

The apostle here likens baptism to the burial and resurrection of
Christ. Any ordinance called baptism performed in some other way is not
in the likeness of Christ's death and resurrection, and is not baptism
at all.

All the early church historians testify that baptism by immersion was
practiced during the first centuries after Christ.

WHAT BAPTISM IS FOR.

The following passages of scripture show that baptism is for the
remission of sins:

    "John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
    repentance for the remission of sins." (Mark 1: 4).

    "And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the
    baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." (Luke 3: 3).

    "Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of
    you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins." (Acts
    2: 38).

The scriptures tell of no ordinance or means by which a remission of
sins can be obtained without baptism. Faith and repentance are not
sufficient. The Bible says of John the Baptist's ministry:

    "All the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God,
    being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and
    lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not
    baptized of him." (Luke 7: 29, 30).

It appears from this that those who refuse to be baptized reject the
counsel of God against themselves. To do this is a great sin, and the
only way to repent of it is to obey the counsel of God, and the counsel
of God is to be baptized.

Cornelius, who is described as "a devout man, and one that feared
God," and who was visited by an angel from heaven was commanded to be
baptized. (Acts 10: 48). This shows {328} that baptism is necessary for
all mankind, no matter how righteous they may be.

OTHER PURPOSES OF BAPTISM.

Jesus said it was necessary for Him to be baptized, in order to fulfill
all righteousness, though He was without sin:

    "Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized
    of him. But John forbade him, saying, I have need to be baptized
    of thee, and comest thou to me? And Jesus answering said unto him,
    Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all
    righteousness." (Matthew 3: 13, 14, 15).

If it was becoming or proper that the Savior, who was without sin,
should obey this ordinance, how much more becoming and necessary it is
for all mankind, who are in sin, to follow Him and be baptized!

Baptism is one of the ordinances by which persons are admitted into the
church of Christ, as shown by the following scriptures:

    "Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the
    same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls."
    (Acts 2: 41).

    "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
    into the kingdom of God." (John 3: 5).

To be "born of water" one must be baptized in water. Upon another
occasion Jesus said,

"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved: but he that
believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16: 16).

In no part of the scripture is it stated that man can be admitted into
the church of Christ or be saved without baptism. It is an ordinance
binding upon all who have reached the age of accountability.

The words of Jesus to the thief on the cross, "To-day shalt thou be
with me in paradise," (Luke 23: 43), are believed by some to mean that
the thief was promised salvation without complying with the ordinance
of baptism. The Apostle Peter says Christ, after being "put to death
in the flesh," "went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which
sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited
in the days of Noah." (I Peter 3: 18, 19, 20). Three days after His
crucifixion, and after He was resurrected, Jesus said to Mary: "Touch
me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father." (John 20: 17). This
proves that Christ did not go to heaven on the day He told the thief he
would be with {329} Him in Paradise; if He did not, then it is evident
that the thief did not.

THE BAPTISM OF INFANTS.

The baptism of infants is not an ordinance of Christ's church. He never
instituted such a practice, and does not require it nor approve of
it. Baptism as has been shown, is for the remission of sins, and for
admission into the kingdom of God. It must follow faith and repentance.
Infants are without sins; they are unable to exercise faith, or to
understand repentance. Concerning them Jesus says:

    "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not:
    FOR OF SUCH IS THE KINGDOM OF GOD." (Mark 10: 13, 14).

THOSE WHO HAVE DIED WITHOUT BAPTISM.

If this ordinance is so essential to salvation, it might be asked,
what becomes of those good people who die without baptism, not knowing
it is necessary? Will they be lost? It might also be asked, What will
become of those good people who die without believing on the Lord Jesus
Christ, never having heard of Him? Let the scriptures answer these
questions:

    "And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
    and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
    evil." (John 3: 19).

    "Where no law is, there is no transgression." (Romans 4: 15).

    "For sin is the transgression of the law." (I John 3: 4).

    "That servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself,
    neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
    stripes. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of
    stripes shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much
    is given, of him shall be much required." (Luke 12: 47, 48).

These passages of scripture are sufficient to make it clear that people
are not condemned until they, after having the privilege of complying
with the law of God, reject it. The Lord in His infinite mercy has
provided means by which all who die without the privilege of hearing
and obeying the Gospel may be saved by future compliance.[1]

But those who do hear it and refuse to obey its teachings simply
because other good people before them who died without {330} the
opportunity did not comply with them in this life, will surely be under
condemnation.

BAPTISM A TEST OF OBEDIENCE.

The fact that baptism is a commandment of God should be enough to
convince any one that it must be observed. It is not an unreasonable
requirement. The Lord promises salvation to those who obey Him.
Baptism is one of the tests of obedience. Nothing but a lack of
faith, repentance and humility will cause one to object to baptism.
An unwillingness to submit to baptism is a proof that faith and
repentance have not been complied with. Baptism therefore serves as a
test of one's faith and repentance, just as repentance is a test of
faith. A spirit of repentance and humility proves that we have faith;
and an honest desire to accept baptism proves that we manifest faith,
repentance and humility.

When these three rules or principles have been sincerely obeyed we are
prepared for the next one. By complying with it the Lord's approval of
our course is to be received.

THE FOURTH RULE--LAYING ON OF HANDS.

Following the ordinance of baptism by immersion in water for the
remission of sins, is that of laying on of hands for the reception of
the Holy Ghost. The manner of conferring the Holy Ghost in the days
of the apostles was by the ordinance of laying on of hands, as the
following passages will show:

    "Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
    Ghost." (Acts 8: 17).

    "When Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands the
    Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money." (Acts 8: 18).

    "When Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on
    them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied." (Acts 19: 6).

Those who truly believe, sincerely repent of their sins, and are
baptized by one having authority are entitled to receive this ordinance
of laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost. If it is
performed by one called of God, that is, one having authority to
administer His ordinances, the Lord will sanction the act by bestowing
the gift of the Holy Ghost upon those who receive the ordinance.

NECESSITY OF LAYING ON OF HANDS.

The scriptures show that it is very essential that this ordinance be
received by all who accept the Gospel of Christ. Like that of baptism,
it is one by which mankind are admitted {331} into the church of
God. When the people of Samaria accepted Philip's testimony and were
baptized, Peter and John were sent to lay hands upon them, that they
might receive the Holy Ghost. (Acts 8: 14-17). If it was not necessary
that the people of Samaria should have this ordinance attended to the
apostles would not have gone to the trouble of sending Peter and John
unto them for that purpose.

OFFICE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

The influence of the Holy Spirit may be felt by men and women who have
not complied with all these rules of the Gospel. The Spirit of the Lord
leads people to have faith, to live good lives, and to perform many
good works, but it will never manifest to any one that his life is
fully approved of the Lord without obeying these ordinances or rules of
His church. People should not think themselves saved because they have
felt the influence of the Holy Ghost prompting them to do right. If
they do not obey its promptings by keeping the commandments of Christ,
that Spirit will not remain with them. The Lord says,

    "My spirit shall not always strive with man." (Genesis 6: 3).

Jesus said to His disciples,

    "I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter;
    that he may abide with you forever." (John 14: 16).

This promise of a Comforter to abide with them forever was on condition
of obedience, as may be learned by reading what follows in the same
chapter of John's Gospel.

Jesus further promised that the Holy Ghost would lead His disciples
into all truth:

    "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all
    truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
    hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things to come."
    (John 16: 13).

In order to be guided into all truth, and to receive the other
blessings conferred by the Holy Spirit, we must obey these first
principles of truth that have been mentioned. Unless we do this we
never can make further progress.

RULES HEREIN EXPLAINED.

In the foregoing the first principles of the Gospel of Christ have been
briefly explained, namely.

1. Faith in God and in His Son Jesus Christ.

2. Repentance.

{332} 3. Baptism by Immersion, for the Remission of Sins.

4. Laying on of Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

That this is the order in which these principles were taught by the
Savior and His disciples, is evident from the writings of the New
Testament.

John the Baptist first called upon those who believed his word to
repent of their sins; and he refused to baptize those who did not show
fruits of repentance. (Matthew 3: 2-8). He also promised that after
their baptism of water they should receive the baptism of the Holy
Ghost. (Matthew 3: 11).

To those who believed his words, spoken on the day of Pentecost, the
Apostle Peter said,

    "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
    Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
    the Holy Ghost." (Act 2: 38).

The people of Samaria who believed Philip's preaching "were baptized,
both men and women." (Acts 8: 12). Afterwards Peter and John were sent
to them that they might receive the Holy Ghost:

    "Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
    Ghost" (Acts 8: 17).

These four rules must be obeyed in order to gain admission into
Christ's church. They are the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

These doctrines were taught by the Savior and His disciples, as
recorded in the Bible. There is no other way of entering the Church
of Christ. Anyone who teaches that there is some other way is under
condemnation. St. Paul says:

    Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
    unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
    accursed." (Galatians 1: 8).

St. John, in speaking of the doctrine of Christ, says:

    "If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
    him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that
    biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds." (II John 10,
    11).

All the doctrines taught by Jesus and His disciples are believed and
taught to-day by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and
all the blessings and gifts that characterized the primitive church are
enjoyed by the Latter-day Saints.

{333}

Footnotes:

1. For further information upon this subject see tract No. 5, entitled
"A Prophet of Latter Days."



THE ANGEL WITH THE GOSPEL.

BY ELDER ORSON PRATT, IN MILLENNIAL STAR, 1866.

    "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven having the
    everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
    to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with
    a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his
    judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven and earth, and
    the sea, and the fountains of waters."--_Rev_. 14: 6-7.

Has the angel, seen in John's vision on Patmos, yet come? Or will
he hereafter come? The Latter-day Saints are diligently and boldly
declaring to the nations that the angel has come, that he has appeared
unto chosen witnesses, that he has committed the everlasting Gospel to
them, commanding them to preach it to all people, to cry with a loud
voice that the hour of God's judgment is come, to call upon all to
fear God, and give glory to Him, and worship Him, etc. There are some
who have heard this solemn testimony of the servants of God, who are
in doubt upon this all important subject. They suppose that the angel
himself was to preach this Gospel to all mankind, and that the angel
himself was to cry with a loud voice, etc. And because all people have
not heard the angel speak, and have not heard the everlasting Gospel
from his own mouth, and have not heard him cry with a loud voice, they
suppose he has not come and denounce the Saints as false witnesses.
But let unbelievers candidly investigate the words of the text, and
see if they are justified in drawing this hasty conclusion. By a
careless glance at the passage, one might suppose that the heavenly
messenger himself was to do all the work of preaching; but the words
evidently do not warrant such a construction. The angel was to fly
having the everlasting Gospel; but that he was to preach the same to
all people, is not mentioned in the text; neither is it, in that place,
declared that he should publish with a loud voice, to all nations, any
proclamation. When he left the heavenly worlds and came to earth, and
committed the message he was intrusted with, into the hands of chosen
vessels, commanding them to preach it, he had fulfilled his part of
the sacred mission, so far as the introduction of the heavenly message
among them was concerned.

{334} The words, "To Preach Unto Them That Dwell on the Earth,"
could be fulfilled by other agents, under the angel's authority and
direction; and the same agency which does the preaching is also
commissioned to say, "With a Loud Voice, Fear God, and Give Glory
to Him for the Hour of His Judgment Is Come." If the passage had
definitely said that the angel who brings the Gospel should likewise
preach it, with a loud voice, there would have been some slight
foundation for apparent objections to the Saints' testimony, but even
then the objections would be only apparent, for this great dispensation
is not yet ended, and there could be no evidence brought that the angel
would not, near the close of the dispensation, actually publish with a
loud voice to all people, the very hour of God's judgment, in all its
fierceness and terror, so that all people would hear His voice. But
such a wonderful and miraculous proclamation in the heavens would not
preclude the angel from sending agents just prior to prepare a people
for so great an event.

When we look at the angel's mission, by the aid of reason, the
conviction at once forces itself upon the mind that he will authorize
missionaries to carry the Gospel to all nations; otherwise how
could believing penitent souls obey the Gospel ordinances? Is it
reasonable to suppose that the angel would travel around on the earth,
and baptize, and confirm by the laying on of hands for the baptism
of the Holy Ghost, and minister the sacrament, and attend to all
church ordinances? It is not only reasonable, but certain, that the
everlasting Kingdom of God will be established on the earth, through
the reception of the Gospel that the angel brings; if so, there must
be officers called and ordained, such as Apostles, Prophets, etc.,
etc., to minister ordinances; otherwise, the everlasting Gospel, though
proclaimed in the heavens by a mighty angel, would be of no use.
Reason, therefore, would testify at once, that the angel at first only
brings the Gospel, and directs other inspired agents to minister in its
numerous ordinances, to build up the Kingdom, to publish with a loud
voice the solemn testimony, that the hour--the terrible hour of God's
judgment is come.

Let no one suppose that because the angel has begun the fulfillment of
John's vision, that he has fully accomplished all things in relation
to it. Hear what new revelation says upon the subject. "And now,
verily, saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O
inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through
the {335} midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel, who hath
appeared unto some, and hath committed it unto man who shall appear
unto many that dwell on the earth; and this Gospel shall be preached
unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue and people, and the servants
of God shall go forth saying with a loud voice, fear God and give glory
to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come; and worship Him that made
heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters, calling
upon the name of the Lord day and night, saying, O, that Thou wouldst
rend the heavens, that Thou wouldst come down, that the mountains might
flow down at Thy presence. And it shall be answered upon their heads,
for the presence of the Lord shall be as the melting fire that burneth,
and as the fire which causeth the waters to boil," etc. (_Doc. and Cov.
sec. 108: par. 7_.)

This same angel is yet to appear unto many; his mission therefore is
not fully completed. Another grand event connected with his mission is
to be fulfilled, when the seven angels sound their trumpets, in the
morning of the seventh thousand years; then all people, both in heaven
and on earth, will hear. But we will quote the word of the Lord: "And
another trump shall sound, which is the fifth trump, which is the fifth
angel who committeth the everlasting Gospel--flying through the midst
of heaven, unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people; and this
shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all people, both in heaven
and in earth, and that are under the earth; for every ear shall hear it
and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they
shall hear the sound of the trump, saying, fear God, and give glory to
Him who sitteth upon the throne forever and ever; for the hour of his
judgment is come. And again another angel shall sound his trump, which
is the sixth angel, saying, she is fallen who made all nations drink of
the wine of the wrath of her fornication; she is fallen, is fallen!"
(_Doc. and Cov. sec. 7: par. 31-32_.)

Thus we have traced the great mission of the angel, from the time that
he flies with the everlasting Gospel, and commits it to man, until the
grand closing up scene of this wicked world, by the sounding of the
seven trumpets. In this last drama the angel of the Gospel will figure
as the fifth in the series. In that awful day, our friend, Mr. William
Brook, of Bradford, who has written to us, asking questions upon this
sublime subject, will have no more supposed reason to complain, because
the angel has not complied with all his suppositions in regard to his
mission. Whether in heaven, {336} on earth, under the earth, or among
the hosts of hell, every ear will hear the sound of the trump, and
every knee bow, and confess to the glory of God, and acknowledge the
power, authority and majesty of Him who sits upon the throne, and of
His holy angels who go forth at His bidding.

Because God has given the keys of the everlasting Gospel to the
fifth angel, let no one suppose that he alone will act in the great
latter-day dispensation. Other angels have their missions to perform,
and will assist in the wonderful work. We again quote from the
revelations given to that great Prophet Joseph Smith, taken from his
inspired key to John's vision on Patmos. The Prophet inquires as
follows:

"What are we to understand by the four angels spoken of in the seventh
chapter and first verse of the Revelation?" He answers: "We are to
understand that they are four angels sent forth from God, to whom is
given power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to
destroy; these are they who have the everlasting Gospel, to commit
to every nation, kindred, tongue and people; having power to shut up
the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of
darkness." (_Pearl of Great Price, p. 34_.)

From the Revelation of John and from the inspired writings of other
holy men, it seems that all the powers of heaven are exerted to
assist in the magnificent preparations for the coming of the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, to assume His rightful authority over this
creation. Shall the heavens above be aroused to the highest degree
of expectation, and the earth still continue to slumber in midnight
darkness? No! verily no! In the great preparation there must be a union
between the heavens and earth. The sons of earth must be awakened from
the deep slumbers of ages. Tidings from the great courts above must be
sent forth by swift messengers, to the nations; the voice of heavenly
truth must penetrate the darkest corners of the habitable globe;
ancient dynasties and powerful governments must be overthrown; thrones
and kingdoms and empires must be cast down; and revolution must succeed
revolution, until every ear shall hear and every heart be penetrated
with the solemn warning voice, until all shall know that the great day
of the Lord is at hand. Swiftly moving messengers from celestial abodes
will freely converse with the sons of God on earth; and every angel and
every servant of God will know his place, and understand what part he
is to perform in the grand preparation for the eternal union of Saints
on earth with the Saints of all ages from heaven.

{337}



THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH ON DOCTRINE.

EXTRACTS FROM A SERMON DELIVERED AT NAUVOO, JUNE 27, 1839, TAKEN FROM
THE HISTORICAL RECORD.

Faith comes by hearing the word of God, through the testimony of the
servants of God; that testimony is always attended by the spirit of
prophecy and revelation.

Repentance is a thing which cannot be trifled with every day. Daily
transgression and daily repentance is not that which is pleasing in the
sight of God.

Baptism is a holy ordinance preparatory to the reception of the Holy
Ghost; it is the channel and key by which the Holy Ghost will be
administered.

The gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands cannot be received
through the medium of any other principle than the principle of
righteousness, for if the proposals are not complied with, it is of no
use, but withdraws.

Tongues were given for the purpose of preaching among those whose
language is not understood, as on the Day of Pentecost, etc.; and it
is not necessary for tongues to be taught to the Church particularly,
for any man that has the Holy Ghost can speak of the things of God in
his own tongue as well as to speak in another; for faith comes not by
signs, but by hearing the word of God.

The doctrine of the resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment are
necessary to preach among the first principles of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

The doctrine of election. St. Paul exhorts us to make our calling and
election sure. This is that sealing power spoken of by Paul in other
places (_Eph. 1: 13, 14_): "In whom ye also trusted, that after ye
heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation, in whom also,
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise
which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the
purchased possession, unto the praise of His glory," that we may be
sealed up unto the day of redemption. This principle ought (in its
proper place) to be taught for God hath not revealed {338} anything to
Joseph but what He will make known unto the twelve, and even the least
Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them, for the
day must come when no man need say to his neighbor, know ye the Lord;
for all shall know him (who remain) from the least to the greatest.
How is this to be done? It is to be done by this sealing power, and
the other comforter spoken of, which will be manifest by revelation.
There are two comforters spoken of. One is the Holy Ghost, the same as
given on the day of Pentecost, and that all Saints receive after faith,
repentance and baptism. This first comforter or Holy Ghost has no other
effect than pure intelligence. It is more powerful in expanding the
mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with
present knowledge, of a man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than
one that is a Gentile, though it may not have half as much visible
effect upon the body; for as the Holy Ghost falls upon one of the
literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and
body are only exercised by the pure spirit of intelligence; while the
effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile is to purge out the old blood
and make him actually of the seed of Abraham. That man that has none
of the blood of Abraham (naturally) must have a new creation by the
Holy Ghost. In such a case there may be more of a powerful effect upon
the body, and visible to the eye, than upon an Israelite, while the
Israelite at first might be far before the Gentile in pure intelligence.

The other comforter spoken of is a subject of great interest, and
perhaps understood by few of this generation. After a person has faith
in Christ, repents of his sins and is baptized for the remission of his
sins, and receives the Holy Ghost (by the laying on of hands), which
is the first comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before
God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every
word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him: Son, thou shalt be
exalted, etc. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that
the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then he will find
his calling and his election made sure; then it will be his privilege
to receive the other comforter, which the Lord has promised the Saints,
as recorded in the testimony of St. John (_John 16: 12-27_): "And I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that
he may abide with you forever, even the Spirit of truth, whom the
world cannot receive because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him;
but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you; I will
not leave you comfortless, {339} I will come to you. He that hath my
commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that
loveth me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest myself to him. If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with
him."

Now what is this comforter? It is no more nor less than the Lord
Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole
matter: that when any man obtains this last comforter, he will have the
personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time
to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will
take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be
opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may
have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and
this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had
such glorious visions--Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle Of Patmos,
St. Paul in the three Heavens, and all the Saints who held communion
with the general assembly and Church of the First Born.

The spirit of revelation is in connection with these blessings. A
person may profit by noticing the first intimations of the spirit of
revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing from
you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, that by noticing it,
you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; that is, those things
that were presented unto your minds by the spirit of God, will come to
pass; and thus by learning the spirit of God and understanding it, you
may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in
Jesus Christ.

An evangelist is a Patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of
Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is
established in the earth, there should be a patriarch for the benefit
of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his
patriarchal blessings unto his sons.

{340}



THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS AND THE WORLD.

BY WILLIAM A. MORTON. (_Copyright by the Author_.)

    "Let us dream no dreams and tell no lies, but go on our way,
    wherever it may lead us, with our eyes open and our heads erect.
    If death ends all, we cannot meet it better. If not, let us enter,
    whatever be the next scene, like honest men, with no sophistry in
    our mouths and no masks on our faces."--Sir James F. Stephen.

I.--THE GODHEAD.

The World:--We understand, Latter-day Saints, that you are delighted
when an opportunity presents itself which enables you to explain to the
world the faith you believe in?

Latter-day Saints:--That is true. We are always ready to give, to every
one that asks of us, a reason for the hope that is within us; for, like
the Apostle Paul, "we are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it
is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth."

The World:--You testify most positively that you know that Joseph Smith
was a Prophet of God; that the Church of which you are members was
established by Divine revelation. You claim that it is the only Church
on earth which teaches the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness?

Latter-day Saints:--That is our position exactly. We testify that
God the Father and Jesus Christ His Son appeared to the boy, Joseph
Smith, in the year 1820. We further testify that the angel which John
the Revelator prophesied would "fly in the midst of heaven, having
the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth,
and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with
a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his
judgment has come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the
sea, and the fountains of water;" (Revelation 14: 6-7) came to Joseph
Smith, and delivered to him a record containing the fulness of the
Gospel of the Son of God. We claim that the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints is, indeed, the true Church of Christ; that it was
established and named by Him; that it has the same officers, holding
the same Divine authority, as the primitive Church, namely, "Apostles,
{341} Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, etc." (Eph. 4: 11.) We
profess to be teaching the very same Gospel that was taught by Christ
and His Apostles. We contend that there is but one true Gospel. Jesus
said, "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leadeth unto
life, and few there be that find it." (Matt. 7: 14.) Paul taught:
"There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope
of your calling: one Lord, one faith, one baptism." (Eph. 4: 4, 5.) He
further said: "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed." (Gal. 1: 8.)

The World:--Well, we have decided to follow the admonition of the
Apostle Paul--"Prove all things; hold fast that which is good" (I.
Thes. 5: 21)--and if you have no objection, we would like to put you on
trial and judge you, according to the law and the testimony, that we
may learn whether the doctrines which you teach are of God or whether
you speak of yourselves.

Latter-day Saints:--We are quite willing to be put on trial, and to be
judged as you have proposed, according to the law and the testimony;
for, as the Prophet Isaiah said, if we speak not according to the law
and the testimony there is no light in us. (Isaiah 8: 20.) We have many
witnesses who are ready and willing to testify in our behalf, men whose
testimony cannot be questioned. They are not men who have followed
cunningly devised fables, but who were eye-witnesses of the things of
which they will speak. If it please the court, we are ready; let the
trial begin.

The World:--The first offence with which you are charged is that of
teaching that the Godhead is composed of three separate and physically
distinct Persons. This, as you must know, is contrary to the teaching
of all the churches, especially the Church of England. That church
teaches that the Godhead is composed of three Persons, namely, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and that these three are one in substance, equal
in power and glory. Here is an extract from the Book of Common Prayer:
"And the Catholick Faith is this: That we worship one God in Trinity,
and Trinity in Unity; neither confounding the Persons: nor dividing the
substance. For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son:
and another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is all one: the Glory equal, the Majesty
co-eternal. * * * The Father eternal, the Son eternal: and the Holy
Ghost eternal. And yet they are not three eternals: but one eternal.
* * * So the {342} Father is God, the Son is God: and the Holy Ghost
is God. And yet they are not three Gods: but one God." (Book of Common
Prayer, pp. 21, 22.)

Latter-day Saints:--We are aware that that is the teaching of the
Church of England, but it is not in harmony with the teaching of Christ
and His disciples. We have a witness named John who was intimately
acquainted with the Son of God, whom we consider a most competent
authority to speak on this matter. He is ready to be examined.

The World:--We will be pleased to hear his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN.

The World:--What is your name?

John:--My name is John, sometimes called the Baptist.

The World:--We understand that you are a disciple of the Lord Jesus
Christ?

John:--I am.

The World:--Were you personally acquainted with the Messiah?

John:--I was. I am His cousin. I was associated with Him during His
ministry.

The World:--Is it true that you were sent before His face to prepare
His way?

John:--It is. The Lord sent an angel to my father, as he prayed in the
temple in Jerusalem, who promised him a son who would go before the
face of the Lord and make His paths straight. I am that son.

The World:--Were you called of God to do that work?

John:--I was. When the angel appeared to my father, he said unto him,
"Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elizabeth
shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John. * * * And
many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.
And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn
the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord."
I also cite to you the testimony of John as recorded in his Gospel,
which reads as follows: "There was a man _sent from God_ whose name was
John." (John 1: 6.)

The World:--What was the nature of your mission?

John:--I was sent to preach repentance and water baptism. I preached in
the wilderness of Judaea, saying unto the people, "Repent ye: for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matt. 3: 1, 2.)

{343} The World:--Were you able to bring many people unto repentance?

John:--Yes, a great many. Mark has made the following record concerning
my missionary labors: "And there went out unto him all the land of
Judaea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the
river Jordan, confessing their sins." (Mark 1: 5.)

The World:--Have you ever heard the voice of God?

John:--I have, on several occasions.

The World:--Mention one of them.

John:--He spoke to me when I did not know that Jesus, my cousin, was
His Only Begotten Son. He said to me, "Upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost." (John 1: 33, 34.)

The World:--Did you baptize Jesus Christ?

John:--I did.

The World:--What took place at His baptism?

John:--That which is recorded in Matthew 3: 16-17: "Jesus when he was
baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and lo, the heavens
were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like
a dove, and lighting upon him: and there came a voice from heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

The World:--Then, John, according to your testimony, the three
Personages who constitute the Godhead are not one in substance, but are
separate and distinct?

John:--They are certainly separate and distinct Personages. When Jesus
came up out of the water, after His baptism, and while He stood on the
bank of the river, the Spirit of God descended like a dove and lighted
upon Him, and at the same time the voice of the Father was heard from
heaven, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."
These things I both saw and heard: I saw Jesus on the bank of the
river; I saw the Spirit of God descend from heaven like a dove and rest
upon Christ; I heard the voice of God out of heaven bear testimony that
Jesus was His beloved Son.

The World (to the Latter-day Saints):--The testimony of the witness
John is certainly very clear and convincing. Have you any other
witnesses to prove that the Godhead consists of three separate Persons?

Latter-day Saints:--We have several. Here is the Apostle Peter.

The World:--We will listen to his testimony.

{344}

PETER'S EVIDENCE.

The World:--Your name is Simon Peter?

Peter:--It is.

The World:--Are you also one of Christ's disciples?

Peter:--I am one of His Apostles.

The World:--Prior to your call to the ministry what was your occupation?

Peter:--I was a fisherman.

The World:--How did you receive your call to the ministry?

Peter:--I was called by Christ Himself.

The World:--Is there a record of your ordination?

Peter:--There is. You will find it recorded in the Gospel according to
Saint Mark, as follows: "And lie ordained twelve, that they should be
with him, and that he might send them forth to preach." (Mark 3: 14.) I
am one of the Twelve.

The World:--Do you believe that God the Father, Jesus Christ His Son,
and the Holy Ghost are three Persons in one substance?

Peter:--I do not.

The World:--Can you furnish evidence that they are separate Personages?

Peter:--I can.

The World:--We will listen to your evidence.

Peter:--On one occasion Jesus took James and John and me up into a
high mountain apart by ourselves, and there He was transfigured before
us. His face shone as the sun and His raiment became as white as snow.
We beheld two heavenly messengers come to Jesus and talk with Him.
They were Moses and Elias. They spoke to Him of His death which He
should accomplish at Jerusalem. We were very much astonished at the
things which we saw, and as soon as Moses and Elias had departed I
went to Jesus and said to Him, "Master, it is good for us to be here:
let us make three tabernacles: one for thee, and one for Moses, and
one for Elias." (Luke 9: 33.) While I was speaking a cloud came and
overshadowed us, and there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, "This
is my beloved Son: hear him." (Luke 9: 34, 35.)

The World:--Was there a record made of what took place on the occasion
of which you speak?

Peter:--There was. It is recorded in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark and
Luke. (Matthew 17; Mark 9; Luke 9.) I {345} also made a record of it in
my second general epistle, as follows: "For he received from God the
Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the
excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him
in the holy mount." (II. Peter 1: 17, 18.) Jesus, in speaking to us on
one occasion, said: "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father." (John 16: 28.)
Now, surely you would not have me interpret Jesus' saying as meaning
that He had come from Himself and was going to return to Himself? I was
with the Savior during that awful night in the Garden of Gethsemane
when in the anguish of His soul He prayed, "Abba, Father, all things
are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not
what I will, but what thou wilt." (Mark 14: 36.) I did not understand
Jesus on that occasion to be praying to Himself.

The World:--The witness is excused.

The Latter-day Saints:--Here are James and John, who will corroborate
the testimony of Peter.

The World:--James, you have heard the testimony of the Apostle Peter,
what have you to say concerning it?

James:--I corroborate it in every particular. I was also on the mount
and heard the voice of God bear testimony that Jesus was His Only
Begotten Son.

The World:--The witness is excused.

The World:--John, you have listened to the testimony of your fellow
Apostles, what have you to say concerning it?

John:--It gives me pleasure to corroborate it. They have spoken the
truth, and nothing but the truth. I also heard the voice of the Father
saying, "This is my beloved Son, hear ye him."

The World:--That is all. (To the Latter-day Saints):--Have you any more
witnesses?

The Latter-day Saints:--We have one more, a man who laid down his life
for the truth's sake; his name is Stephen.

Stephen's testimony.

The World:--What is your name?

Stephen:--My name is Stephen.

The World:--What position did you hold in the Christian Church?

Stephen:--I was one of the seven men who were set apart by the Apostles
to look after the temporal needs of the widows in the church. (Acts 6.)

{346} The World:--Did you also proclaim publicly the Gospel, and bear
testimony to the divinity of Jesus?

Stephen:--I did.

The World:--How was your testimony received by the people?

Stephen:--They denounced me as a blasphemer. On one occasion when I was
preaching to them they gnashed on me with their teeth. (Acts 7: 54.)

The World:--What happened at that time?

Stephen:--The Lord filled me with the Holy Ghost and opened the heavens
to me.

The World:--What did you behold when the heavens were opened?

Stephen:--I beheld God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God.
(Acts 7: 55.)

The World:--You say that you saw God, and Jesus standing on His right
hand. Then, God and Jesus must be two separate Beings?

Stephen:--Certainly. Jesus was not standing at His own right hand.

The World:--You bore testimony to what you saw?

Stephen:--I did.

The World:--How did the people receive your testimony?

Stephen:--It cost me my life. They stoned me to death. (Acts 7: 59, 60.)

The World:--That is all.

Latter-day Saints:--It is not necessary to call any more witnesses. We
have proved, most conclusively, that God the Father, Jesus Christ the
Son, and the Holy Ghost are three separate and distinct Personages.
John proved that, when he testified that he saw Jesus standing on the
bank of the Jordan; then he beheld the Spirit of God descend from
heaven like a dove and rest upon the Messiah, and at the same time
he heard the voice of God testify that Jesus was His Only Begotten
Son. Peter testified that when James and John and himself were on the
mount with Jesus they heard the voice of God testify that Jesus was
His Beloved Son. James and John corroborated his testimony. Stephen
testified that he, being filled with the Holy Ghost, had the heavens
opened to him, and he saw God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
His Father.

The World:--The evidence which you have produced is, indeed,
incontrovertible. It is, to be sure, contrary to the teachings which
we have received in the churches and from our fathers. But we now call
to mind the words of the {347} Prophet Jeremiah, "O Lord, my strength
and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles
shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely
our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no
profit." (Jeremiah 16: 19.)

II.--THE PERSONALITY OF GOD.

The World (to the Latter-day Saints):--It is true, then, as we have
been told, that you believe and teach that God the Father is a personal
Being, possessing a definite form, with bodily parts and spiritual
passions?

Latter-day Saints:--Such is our belief and teaching.

The World:--This also is contrary to the teachings of almost every
church in Christendom. The Church of England, in the first of the
"Articles of Religion," published in its Prayer Book, says: "There
is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts or
passions; of infinite power, wisdom and goodness."

Latter-day Saints:--We believe in the God of the Bible, in the God of
Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob; the God of all the holy Prophets,
and the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We have witnesses
whose testimonies cannot be impeached. They are men who can testify
from actual experience, men who saw God, and who conversed with Him
face to face, and whose testimonies should, therefore, be worthy of all
acceptation.

The World:--We will be pleased to listen to your witnesses. Let the
first witness be called.

Latter-day Saints:--The first witness who will testify in our behalf is
Abraham, "the father of the faithful and the friend of God."

Abraham's testimony.

The World:--What is your name?

Abraham:--My name is Abraham. I was at first called Abram, but the Lord
changed my name to Abraham. (Genesis 17: 5.)

The World:--Have you ever had a revelation from God?

Abraham:--I have had many.

The World:--Relate one.

Abraham:--When my wife and I were residing with my parents in Haran the
Lord spoke to me, saying, "Abram, get thee out of thy country, and from
thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew
then: and I will {348} make of thee a great nation, and I will bless
thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing; and I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in
thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed." (Genesis 12: 1-3.)

The World:--You were, of course, obedient to the Lord?

Abraham:--I was. I took my wife, Lot, my brother's son, and all those
who believed what the Lord had said to me, and, with our substance, we
set out for the land of Canaan. While we were camped in the plain of
Moreh the Lord appeared unto me and said, "Unto thy seed will I give
this land." (Genesis 12: 7).

The World:--Were you visited by the Lord on any other occasion?

Abraham:--I was. I was ninety-nine years old at the time. We were
living in the plains of Mamre. The Lord appeared to me there and said,
"I am the Almighty God; walk before me and be thou perfect. And I
will make my covenant between me and thee, and I will multiply thee
exceedingly. * * * As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and
thou shalt be a father of many nations. * * * And I will make thee
exceedingly fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall
come out of thee." (Genesis 17: 1-6.) I am testifying of things which I
have seen with my own eyes; I saw the Lord and talked with Him face to
face, as one man talks with another.

The World:--We have no further questions to ask the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--We have another witness who is prepared to give as
strong and as irrefutable evidence as the previous one. His name is
Moses.

The World:--We will listen to his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MOSES.

The World:--Your name is Moses?

Moses:--It is.

The World:--Where were you born?

Moses:--I was born in Egypt, of Hebrew parents.

The World:--It is true that at the time of your birth Pharaoh made a
decree that all the male children of the Hebrews were to be thrown into
the river Nile?

Moses:--It is.

The World:--How did you escape the fate of the others?

Moses:--My mother made a little ark of bulrushes, daubed it with slime
and pitch, and placing me in it she took it down {349} and left it on
the flags by the river's brink. In a short time Pharaoh's daughter came
down to the river. Seeing the ark, she requested her maid to fetch it.
On removing the cover, she beheld me in tears. Her heart was touched,
and she decided to keep me as her own child. My sister Miriam, who was
in hiding near by, came forward and proffered to get a nurse for the
baby. The king's daughter gave her permission to do so, so she went and
brought my mother. When my mother arrived, Pharaoh's daughter said to
her, "Take this child away and nurse it for me, and I will give thee
thy wages." (Exodus 2: 9.) So my mother had the pleasure of raising her
own child, and was well paid for doing so. When I was grown I was taken
to the court of Pharaoh, and adopted by his daughter. I was treated as
though I were her own son and was taught in all the learning of the
Egyptians.

The World:--You did not take very well to Egyptian court life?

Moses:--I did not; I would much rather have been with my own people. I
finally ran away from Pharaoh and went to Midian, where I fell in love
with and married Zipporah, a daughter of Jethro, a priest of Midian.
(Exodus 2: 21.)

The World:--What occupation did you follow?

Moses:--I was a sheep-herder; I tended the flocks of my father-in-law.

The World:--We have been told that on one occasion while you were
herding the sheep you had a heavenly manifestation; is the report true?

Moses:--It is. While I was tending the sheep one day I beheld a burning
bush. I went over to see the strange sight, and as I approached the
bush God called unto me out of the midst of the bush and said, "Moses,
Moses." And I said, "Here am I." And He said, "Draw not nigh hither;
put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou
standest is holy ground. Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." (Exodus
3: 4-6.) On hearing that, I hid my face; for I was afraid to look upon
God. Then the Lord said unto me, "I have surely seen the afflictions
of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason
of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows. * * * Go, and gather
the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The Lord God of your
fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto
me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to
you in Egypt and I have said, I {350} will bring you up out of the
affliction of Egypt. * * * unto a land flowing with milk and honey."
(Exodus 3.)

The World:--Did you do as the Lord commanded you?

Moses:--I did, and the Lord, in His infinite mercy, and by many signs
and wonders, brought the children of Israel up out of Egypt into their
own land.

The World:--Have you ever seen God?

Moses:--I have. On one occasion I talked with Him face to face. I was
in the tabernacle at the time. A cloudy pillar descended and stood at
the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with me. And all the
people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the
people rose up and worshiped, every man in his tent door. And the Lord
spake unto me face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. (Exodus
33: 9-12.) Later He hid me in the cleft of a rock, and as He passed by,
in His glory, I beheld His back parts. (Exodus 33: 22-23.)

The World:--Did any of your associates ever see God?

Moses:--Yes, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu and seventy of the elders of Israel
and myself saw Him on one occasion. (Exodus 24: 9, 10.)

The World:--Is it true that you spent forty days and forty nights with
the Lord on Mount Sinai?

Moses:--It is. It was on that occasion that He gave me two tables of
stone on which He had written with His own finger the ten commandments
for the children of Israel.

The World:--Moses, we recognize you as one who is fully competent to
speak on this important matter. You have seen the Lord a number of
times; you have talked with Him face to face; you have been with Him
for forty days and forty nights at one time; now, we would like you to
describe to us, just as plainly as you can, the true and the living God.

Moses:--I tell you in plainness and in all truth, that God is just
like a perfect man. If you could see God today you would see Him just
as Abraham saw Him, just as I saw Him, in the form of man, for man was
made in the image of God. (Genesis 1: 27.)

The World:--Thank you; that is all.

Latter-day Saints (to the World):--Surely the testimony of these two
witnesses ought to be enough to convince you that the God whom we
worship--a God with body, parts and passions--is, indeed, the true God,
the God of the Bible. But these are not all our witnesses. We have
others, whose testimony we desire you to hear.

{351} The World:--Let them come forward.

Latter-day Saints:--Thomas, the World desires to hear your testimony.

TESTIMONY OF THOMAS.

The World:--Were you acquainted with the Lord Jesus Christ when He was
on the earth?

Thomas:--I was.

The World:--What position did you hold in the Church of Christ?

Thomas:--I was an Apostle.

The World:--Did you see the Savior after His resurrection?

Thomas:--I did. I at first considered the news too good to be true.
When the other Apostles told me that they had seen the risen Lord, I
said, "Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I
will not believe."

The World:--Did Christ show Himself to you after that?

Thomas:--He did. Eight days later I was with the Apostles in a house
in Jerusalem when the Savior appeared in our midst. As soon as He
entered the room He said, "Peace be unto you." Then turning to me, He
said, "Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach
hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless,
but believing." (John 20: 26, 27.) I recognized Him at once, and I
exclaimed, "My Lord and my God!"

The World:--You saw the print of the nails in His hands, and the mark
of the spear in His side?

Thomas:--I did.

The World:--Then, He must have appeared to you in the same body in
which He was crucified?

Thomas:--He did, in the very same body of flesh and bones, but
quickened by Spirit. (Luke 24: 39.)

The World:--Did you see Him after that!

Thomas:--I did, a number of times. One evening Simon Peter, Nathaniel
of Cana, the sons of Zebedee, two other disciples and I went out
fishing. We fished the entire night, but caught nothing. As we were
returning in the morning, we saw a "man," as we supposed, standing on
the shore. He asked us if we had any meat, and we answered that we
had not. He told us to cast our net on the right side of the ship. We
did so, and to our astonishment we caught one hundred and fifty-three
fishes. John was the first to recognize the "man" on the shore, and
as soon as he saw who He was, he {352} exclaimed, "It is the Lord!"
On hearing that, Peter jumped into the sea and swam to the shore. We
were delighted to meet our beloved Redeemer once again. The Lord had
prepared a fire of coals, and had some fish cooked. He invited us to
come and dine with Him, which we did, and ate heartily of bread and
fish. That was the third time that Jesus showed Himself to us after His
resurrection. (John 21.)

The World:--Were you present at the ascension of Christ?

Thomas:--I was.

The World:--Tell us what took place on that occasion.

Thomas:--Just before His ascension He said to us, "Ye shall receive
power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be
witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria,
and unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Acts 1: 8.) As soon as He
had finished speaking He was taken up, and a cloud received Him out
of our sight. As we stood gazing after Him, two men dressed in white
apparel appeared, and, addressing us, said, "Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from
you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go
into heaven." (Acts 1st chap.)

The World:--That is all, Thomas.

Latter-day Saints (to the World):--We have proved by the last witness,
an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, that Christ arose from the grave
in the same body which was nailed to the cross, but immortalized; in
that body He appeared to His disciples; in that same body He made a
fire of coals on the shore and prepared food, which He ate with His
disciples; in that same body He ascended into heaven; in that same body
He shall come again to the earth.

The World:--What evidence have you that Christ shall come again in His
crucified body?

Latter-day Saints:--We have the testimony of the Prophet Zechariah.

The World:--We will hear what he has to say.

TESTIMONY OF ZECHARIAH.

The World:--Your name is Zechariah?

Zechariah:--It is.

The World:--Were you a Prophet in Israel?

Zechariah:--I was so honored of the Lord.

The World:--Did you prophesy concerning the second coming of Christ?

{353} Zechariah:--I did. I prophesied and said, "And his feet shall
stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem
on the east, and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof
toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great
valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and
half of it toward the south." (Zechariah 14: 4.) "And one shall say
unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer,
Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zechariah
13: 6.)

The World:--We will excuse the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--We have another witness whose testimony we would
like you to hear; his name is Paul.

The World:--We will be pleased to listen to his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL.

The World:--Your name is Paul?

Paul:--It is.

The World:--Are you an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ?

Paul:--I am.

The World:--Have you ever seen Christ?

Paul:--I have. (I Cor. 15: 8.)

The World:--What is your testimony concerning Christ?

Paul:--It is the same as that of Thomas and the rest of the
Apostles--that He has a body of flesh and bones.

The World:--What is your testimony concerning God, the Father of Christ?

Paul:--I testify that as Christ is so is His Father. I wrote to the
Hebrew saints on this matter, as follows: "Who being the brightness
of His glory, and the express image of His person, and upholding all
things by the word of His power, when He had Himself purged our sins,
sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." (Heb. 1: 3.) Christ
said on one occasion: "He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father."

The World:--We have no further questions to ask the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--We now respectfully ask you to listen to the
testimony of the young prophet, Joseph Smith.

The World:--We have heard a great deal concerning that young man. It
has been reported that he declared he had seen God the Father and His
Son Jesus Christ.

Latter-day Saints:--Such, indeed, was his testimony, and tens of
thousands of us have received testimonies from the Lord that he spoke
the truth.

{354} The World:--We will hear him for ourselves.

TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH SMITH.

The World:--Your name is Joseph Smith, Jr.?

Joseph Smith:--It is.

The World:--Are you the founder of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints?

Joseph Smith:--I was simply an humble instrument in the hands of the
Lord in re-establishing, according to the revelations of God, the
Church of Christ upon the earth.

The World:--So, you profess to have received revelations from God?

Joseph Smith:--I do. More than that: I have seen God and His Son Jesus
Christ, and have talked with them.

The World:--We are desirous of hearing from your own lips your
testimony concerning this matter.

Joseph Smith:--Realizing that I, as well as all other men, shall
have to stand some day before the judgment bar of God to be judged
according to my works, my testimony in this case shall be the truth,
and the truth only, God being my witness. I was born in the year of
our Lord one thousand eight hundred and five, on the twenty-third day
of December, in the town of Sharon, Windsor county, state of Vermont.
My father, Joseph Smith, Senior, left the state of Vermont, and moved
to Palmyra, Ontario (now Wayne) county, in the state of New York, when
I was in my tenth year, or thereabouts. In about four years after my
father's arrival in Palmyra, he moved with his family into Manchester,
in the same county of Ontario. His family consisted of eleven souls,
namely--my father, Joseph Smith; my mother, Lucy Smith (whose name,
previous to her marriage, was Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack); my
brothers, Alvin (who died November 19th, 1824, in the 27th year of
his age), Hyrum, myself, Samuel Harrison, William, Don Carlos; and my
sisters, Sophronia, Catherine, and Lucy. Some time in the second year
after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived
an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the
Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region
of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by
it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious
parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people,
some crying, "Lo, here?" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contending
for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian, {355} and some for
the Baptist. For notwithstanding the great love which the converts to
these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and
the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active
in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious
feeling, in order to have everybody converted, as they were pleased to
call it, let them join what sect they pleased--yet when the converts
began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen
that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts
were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad
feeling ensued; priest contending against priest, and convert against
convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever
had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about
opinions. I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family
was proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined that
church, namely--my mother Lucy; my brothers Hyrum and Samuel Harrison;
and my sister Sophronia. During this time of great excitement, my mind
was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my
feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from
all these parties, though I attended their several meetings as often
as occasion would permit. In process of time my mind became somewhat
partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with
them; but so great were the confusion and strife among the different
denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was, and
so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion
who was right and who wrong. My mind at times was greatly excited, the
cry and tumult were so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most
decided against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of
either reason or sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least, to make
the people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists
and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous in endeavoring to
establish their own tenets and disprove all others. In the midst of
this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself,
What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or, are they
all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how
shall I know it? While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties
caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day
reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which
reads: "_If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to
all men liberally, and upbraideth_ {356} _not, and it shall be given
him_." Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the
heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter
with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it
again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I
did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom
than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion
of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so
differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by
an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion that I must
either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James
directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to
"ask of God," concluding that if He gave wisdom to them that lacked
wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture. So,
in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to
the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful,
clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was
the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst
all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally.
After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go,
having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and
began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done
so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely
overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind
my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around
me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden
destruction. But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver
me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the
very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself
to destruction--not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some
actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I
had never before felt in any being--just at this moment of great alarm,
I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness
of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. It no
sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held
me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two personages, whose
brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the
air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said, pointing
to the other--"_This is my beloved Son, hear him_!" My object in going
to enquire of the Lord was to know {357} which of all the sects was
right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I
get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the
personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects
was right--and which I should join. I was answered that I must join
none of them, for they were all wrong; and the personage who addressed
me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that
those professors were all corrupt; that "they draw near to me with
their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrine
the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the
power thereof." He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many
other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time.
When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking
up into heaven. Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to
be in company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active
in the beforementioned religious excitement; and, conversing with him
on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of
the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior;
he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt,
saying, it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as
visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased
with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them. I
soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great
deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion and was the
cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I
was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age,
and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence
in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to
excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution;
and this was common among all the sects--all united to persecute me.
It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very
strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years
of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a
scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character
of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of
the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them
a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or
not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself.
However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision. I have
thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made {358} his
defence before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he
had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but
few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was
mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy
the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and
all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and
though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would
know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light, and heard a
voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think
or believe otherwise. So it was with me. I had actually seen a light,
and in the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did
in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for
saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were
persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me
falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me
for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision, and who am I that
I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I
have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that
God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it, at least I
knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation.

The World:--Then, according to your testimony, God the Father, and
Jesus Christ are two distinct Personages?

Joseph Smith:--That is my testimony. "The Father has a body of flesh
and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also: but the Holy Ghost has
not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of spirit. Were it
not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us."

The World:--So that if we were to see God now, we would see Him in the
form of man?

Joseph Smith:--You would. "If the veil was rent today, and the Great
God, who holds this world in its orbit, who upholds all worlds and all
things by His power, was to make Himself visible--I say, If you were to
see Him today, you would see Him like a man in form--like yourselves in
all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in
the very fashion, image, and likeness of God, and received instruction
from, and walked, talked, and conversed with Him, as one man talks and
communes with another."

The World:--The witness is excused.

Latter-day Saints:--This closes our case. You have heard the
testimonies of Abraham, Moses, Thomas, Zechariah, Paul, {359} and
Joseph Smith. The testimonies of these servants of the Lord are similar
in every respect. You cannot reject the testimony of Joseph Smith
without rejecting the testimonies of the others. We pray you, give heed
to these things; for "this is life eternal: to know the living and true
God, and Jesus Christ, whom He has sent."

III.--FAITH AND WORKS.

The World:--What are the first principles and ordinances of your
religion?

Latter-day Saints:--The first principles and ordinances of our religion
are these: First, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance;
third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying
on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

The World:--Do you believe that good works must accompany faith in
order for men to obtain salvation?

Latter-day Saints:--We do. We maintain that belief alone is not
sufficient to bring salvation to any man. "Faith without works is
dead." Faith is the first principle of the Gospel of Christ: it is the
foundation upon which every other principle and ordinance rests. You
remember, the Apostle Paul said, "But without faith it is impossible to
please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that
he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him." (Heb. 11: 6.)

The World:--Well, we have been taught that all a person has to do in
order to be saved is to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. That is the
Gospel which Paul and Silas preached to the Philippian jailor and his
household. When the jailor asked Paul and his companion what he should
do to be saved, they answered, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shalt be saved." (Acts 16: 30, 31.)

Latter-day Saints:--No, that is only part of the Gospel which Paul
and Silas preached to the jailor and his house. They did not stop at
belief, as the majority of preachers do in these days. But here is the
Apostle Paul; he can speak for himself.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL.

The World:--Paul, when the Philippian jailor asked you and Silas what
he should do to be saved, what did you tell him?

Paul:--We told him to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and he would be
saved, and also his house. (Acts 16: 31.)

The World:--We thought so. Now, if the jailor and his {360} household
had simply to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ in order to gain
salvation, why should other people have to do more?

Paul:--But we did not tell the jailor and his household that that was
all they had to do. We taught them other doctrines besides belief in
Christ; we taught them the ordinance of baptism. Here is what the
record says: "Then he (the jailor) called for a light, and sprang in,
and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought
them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said,
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy
house. And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that
were in his house. And he took them the same hour of the night, and
washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all his straightway."
(Acts 16: 29-33.)

The World:--You have spoken truly, Paul. We see that, according to the
record, after you had told the jailor to believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, you taught him and his household other commandments of the
Lord, among them baptism. One more question: Did you preach to the
people that Jesus Christ was the author of eternal salvation?

Paul:--I did.

The World:--And Jesus Christ, the author of eternal salvation, taught
this doctrine, that "God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but
have eternal life?"

Paul:--He did. But you have quoted only _part_ of what I said and only
_part_ of what Christ said. I did not tell the people that Christ had
become the author of eternal salvation to all those who would simply
believe in Him. Here is what I said: "Though he were a Son, yet learned
he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect,
he became the author of eternal salvation _unto all them that obey
him_." (Heb. 5: 8, 9.) Jesus did not tell the people that they would
have eternal life by simply believing in Him. This is what He said:
"Not every one that sayeth unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is
in heaven." (Matt 7: 21.) Now, it would appear from this that there
were people in the days of the Savior who believed, as thousands of
people believe today, that they could get into the Kingdom of God by
simply believing in Christ, and calling Him Lord, Lord. And in order
to disabuse their minds of that erroneous belief. Jesus made use of
the words which I have just quoted. Now, do you think that I, or any
other servant of the Lord, would {361} preach salvation through belief
alone when Christ had condemned such doctrine? On one occasion He said:
"And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I will
shew you to whom he is like: he is like a man which built an house,
and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock: and when the flood
arose the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake
it: for it was founded upon a rock. But he that heareth, and doeth
not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the
earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it
fell; and the ruin of that house was great." (Luke 6: 46-49.) Here is
a Gospel not only of believing, but of _doing_: a Gospel, not of faith
alone, but of _faith and works_.

The World:--We dare not dispute what you have said; were we to do so,
we would be disputing the words of Christ. Permit us, however, to ask
you another question.

Paul:--Certainly.

The World:--Isn't it a fact that Christ, when He was upon the cross,
and just as He was about to give up the ghost, said, "It is finished"?

Paul:--That is true.

The World:--Did Christ not mean that He had done all that was necessary
for man's salvation? that He had paid the price of man's redemption,
and that there was nothing left for mankind to do?

Paul:--Part of what you have said is, indeed, true: Christ atoned for
our sins on Calvary's cross; He died that we might live, and that He
might present us, pure and spotless, to the Father. But when He said,
"It is finished," He did not mean that from that time henceforth and
forever mankind would have nothing whatever to do but to believe in
Him, and by that simple assent of their minds obtain eternal life and
an everlasting inheritance in the Kingdom of His Father. He meant that
His sufferings were at an end; He meant that He had drunk the bitter
cup to the dregs; He meant that He had done the will of the Father, and
had thus become, as I told the Hebrew Saints, the author of eternal
salvation to all those who would obey Him. After Christ had risen from
the dead He tarried for forty days with His disciples, during which
time He taught them many things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. In
giving them their commission, He said to them, "Go ye, therefore, and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have {362} commanded you." (Matt. 28: 19-20.) So you see,
Christ did not tell His Apostles to tell the people that all they had
to do was to believe in Him: they were to teach them to observe all
things whatsoever He had commanded them.

The World:--Did you write an epistle to the Ephesians?

Paul:--I did.

The World:--Here is an extract from it to which we desire to call your
attention: "For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should
boast." (Eph. 2: 8, 9.) Did you write that?

Paul:--I did.

The World:--What did you mean by writing in this way to the Ephesians?

Paul:--Merely this, and nothing more: the Ephesians, as well as many
others, thought to justify themselves by the works of the law--by
circumcision, for instance. They did not understand that the law
had been fulfilled in Christ, and so they wanted to continue in the
practice of dead works. These I condemned, but I never spoke one word
against the commandments of the Lord Jesus Christ. On the contrary,
I exhorted the people to perform good works. This is what I wrote to
the Ephesians: "Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth,
the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free."
(Ephesians 6: 8.) I wrote practically the same thing to Titus. Here
is an extract from my letter to him: "This is a faithful saying, and
these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have
believed in God might be careful to maintain good works." (Titus 3: 8.)
Surely you do not think that I would write to the Ephesians one time
condemning good works, and write afterwards to them and also to Titus
commending good works? The works that I condemned were dead works, such
as circumcision; but God forbid that I should advise anyone against
keeping all the commandments of the Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus said that
he who would break one of the least of His commandments, and teach men
to do so, the same would be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

The World:--That is all, Paul.

Latter-day Saints:--Perhaps you would like to hear the testimony of the
Apostles John and James?

The World:--Certainly, if they can give us any additional light on the
subject.

Latter-day Saints:--John, we would be pleased to have {363} you tell
The World whether you consider good works essential to salvation.

JOHN'S TESTIMONY.

John:--I am more than pleased to speak on this important matter. As an
Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, I taught the people to do the will of
God as it had been laid down by the Savior.

The World:--It is recorded in the Gospel which bears your name that
Christ said, "God so loved the world that he gave his only Begotten
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life?"

John:--That is correct.

The World:--Did you not infer from that that all a man had to do in
order to be saved was to believe in Christ?

John:--I did not; for Christ, just a little while before, had said to
Nicodemus, who knew that Jesus was a Teacher sent of God: "Except a
man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of
God." (John 3: 5.) There is something more than belief in those words.

The World:--Did you not teach the people that the blood of Jesus Christ
would cleanse them from all sin?

John:--I did; but it was on the condition that they walked as Christ
walked. This is what I said: "If we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." (I John 1: 7.) After Christ
had taught us the principles of the Gospel, He said to us: "If ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do them." (John 13: 17.) Again He
said to us: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me
the works that I do shall he do also." (John 14: 12.) The Lord gave me
a vision when I was on the Isle of Patmos: "and I saw the dead, small
and great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and another
book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged
out of those things which were written in the books, according to their
works." (Rev. 20: 12.) In the face of all these things, how could I
believe that belief alone in Christ was all that was necessary for
salvation?

The World:--The witness is excused.

TESTIMONY OF JAMES.

The World:--James, were you commissioned by the Lord Jesus Christ to
preach His Gospel?

James:--I was.

{364} The World:--Did you not teach the people that all that was
necessary in order to attain to salvation was belief in the Lord Jesus
Christ?

James:--How dare I teach such doctrine when the Lord had instructed us
to teach them to observe all things whatsoever He had commanded us?

The World:--Then, you believe that in order for a man to procure
salvation he must have works with his faith?

James:--I do most assuredly. I taught the people that faith without
works is dead. Surely you have read my epistle, wherein I said: "What
doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have
not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and
destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace,
be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things
which are needful to the body; what doth it profit? Even so faith, if
it hath not works, is dead, being alone. Yea, a man may say, Thou hast
faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I
will shew thee my faith by my works. * * * But wilt thou know, O vain
man, that faith without works is dead? * * * For as the body without
the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also." (James 2:
14-18, 20, 26.)

The World:--This is certainly strange doctrine to us. We have been
taught from childhood that all we had to do to be saved was to believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ.

James:--You say that that is what the preachers have taught you?

The World:--It is. The only gospel that we have been taught is the
gospel of Belief Alone. We have never been taught that we had to do
anything towards our salvation.

James:--You have been deceived by false teachers, whom Paul prophesied
would rise up in the last days. Here is the prophecy: "For the time
will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own
lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and
they shall turn away their ears from the truth and shall be turned into
fables." (II Timothy 4: 3, 4.)

The World:--Paul truly prophesied as you have said; but do you think
his prophecy applies to the preachers of the present time?

James:--I would prefer that you answer that question yourselves. I
believe that I can make this matter very plain to you. Supposing a man
were to come to you at the present time and tell you that good works
were not at all essential to {365} salvation, that all you had to do to
be saved was to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; and after he had gone
out three Apostles of the Lord Jesus should come in and tell you that
belief alone would not save you, that you would have to couple works
with your faith, which of these men would you believe?

The World:--That scarcely needs an answer: we would, of course, believe
the Apostles.

James:--I thought as much. Well, Paul, John and I have told you, just
as plainly as it is possible for us to do, that belief alone will not
save you: that you must have works as well as faith. And as you have
told me that you believe our words, I would advise you, if you do not
wish to deceive yourselves, to be doers of the word, as well as hearers
of it.

The World:--Thank you, James. That is all.

Latter-day Saints:--The words of the Apostles are very plain, indeed;
James told us that what the spirit is to the body so works are to
faith; and that as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith
without works is dead also. We would advise you to accept the teachings
of Christ and of His inspired Apostles.

The World:--In the face of all these Scriptures, we cannot see how our
preachers can teach that good works are not essential to salvation.

Latter-day Saints:--We are not at all surprised at their doing so. If
the Scriptures are to be fulfilled, we must expect to see men arise
speaking perverse things, and drawing away disciples after them. It
has been clearly proven that Christ and His Apostles taught that men
would have to couple good works with their faith if they expected to
get salvation. Now, any doctrine contrary to the teaching of Christ and
His Apostles is the doctrine of men. But as it was in the days of the
Savior, so it is today. Christ said of the people in His day: "This
people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoreth me with
their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship
me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." (Matt. 15: 8, 9.)

The World:--We are very thankful to you for calling our attention
to these plain and precious truths, and the next time that we are
visited by our ministers we will request them to tell us who gave them
authority to preach that good works are not essential to salvation,
when the Lord Jesus Christ and His Apostles taught that they are. For
our ministers have most assuredly taught us that the Lord would not
accept of any good works that we might do.

Latter-day Saints:--Then He has changed since the days {366} of the
early Apostles. Do you not remember what happened to Cornelius?
Cornelius was not like the people of the present day, for he believed
in having good works with his faith; and instead of the Lord being
displeased with him for performing good works, He sent an angel from
heaven to tell him that his prayers and his alms had come up for a
memorial before God. (Acts 10: 4.) Now, if all the ministers in the
world told you that good works are not essential to salvation, all you
would have to do would be to turn to this Scripture, and there you
could show them how the Lord had so approved of a man's good works
that He sent an angel from heaven to tell him that He had accepted of
them, and to tell him of other things which were necessary for him
to do. And, if that were not sufficient, you could refer them to the
writings of the Apostle Peter, who said: "And besides this, giving
all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and
to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience
godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
kindness charity. For if these things be in you and abound, they make
you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacketh these things is blind, and
cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his
old sins. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never
fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." (II Peter
1: 5-11.)

IV.--REPENTANCE.

The World:--You say, Faith in God and in His Son Jesus Christ is the
first principle of the Gospel, and the second is Repentance?

Latter-day Saints:--Yes, the second principle of the Gospel is
repentance.

The World:--What do you understand the term repentance to mean?

Latter-day Saints:--Repentance is a deep, sincere, heartfelt sorrow
for sin, producing a reformation of life. It is, in a word, ceasing to
do evil and learning to do well. Here is the Apostle Paul, who will be
pleased to speak upon this important subject.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL.

Paul:--I speak from experience concerning this most essential {367}
principle of the Gospel of Christ. I was, as you all know, a most
unrelenting persecutor of the Saints. I had even gone so far as
to assent to the death of the faithful Stephen. I was on my way
to Damascus, with letters from the high priest, authorizing me to
bring bound to Jerusalem all those whom I found professing faith in
Jesus Christ. I verily believed that I was doing God service. As I
neared Damascus, the Lord checked me in my evil course and called
me to repentance. He declared that by persecuting His saints I was
persecuting Him, and told me to desist from my ungodly work. On
hearing the word of the Lord, my soul was rilled with remorse, and I
immediately turned round and, by a life consecrated to Christ and His
cause, sought to atone for my past offences.

The World:--Was it the Lord, then, who led you to repentance?

Paul:--It was, for repentance is one of the most precious gifts of God
to men. Through the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ that choice gift
has been purchased for poor, fallen humanity. But, I would have you
understand, that God is jealous of all His gifts. He does not bestow
them where they would not be appreciated. Repentance, like every other
gift of God, has been promised to men on certain conditions.

The World:--Please tell us what these conditions are.

Paul:--One of the conditions is that men will manifest a desire to
cease from sin, and to work righteousness in the sight of God. The
Lord, speaking through Isaiah the prophet, made a promise unto the
children of men that if they would seek Him they would find Him, and
that if they would forsake their evil ways and thoughts and turn unto
Him, He would pardon their transgressions. I quote from the writings of
the prophet: "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him
while he is near: let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon." (Isaiah
55: 6, 7.) Thus we see that the gift of repentance is promised men
on condition that they seek the Lord and forsake their evil ways and
thoughts. The Lord has assured us that He has no pleasure whatever in
the death of a sinner. Speaking to the house of Israel by the mouth
of the Prophet Ezekiel, He said: "Say unto them, as I live, saith the
Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the
wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?" "Again, when I say unto
{368} the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and
do that which is lawful and right; if the wicked restore the pledge,
given again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without
committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die. None of
his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath
done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live." (Ezek.
33: 11, 14-16.) But, behold, a greater than Ezekiel has testified to
the same thing. Here are the words of Jesus Christ, the Author of
eternal salvation: "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance." (Luke 5: 32.) "I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be
in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and
nine just persons, which need no repentance." (Luke 15: 7.)

The World:--Thank you, Paul, for your testimony.

Latter-day Saints:--We have another witness who was called by the Lord
to preach repentance to the people of his generation.

The World:--We are ready to listen to his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF NOAH.

The World:--What is your name?

Noah:--My name is Noah.

The World:--Were you called by the Lord to preach repentance unto the
people in your day?

Noah:--I was. The Lord beheld that the wickedness of the children
of men was great upon the earth. They had entirely turned away from
the holy commandments which had been delivered unto them. They took
pleasure in all manner of wickedness and abominations. They were,
as are millions of the human family at the present time, "lovers of
pleasure more than lovers of God." The Lord saw that the imaginations
of their hearts were evil continually, and that they would surely
perish if they did not turn from their wicked, reprobate ways.
Therefore, He called me to be a preacher of righteousness, and
commissioned me to go forth and cry repentance unto that wicked and
perverse generation. I was commanded to build an ark, into which I was
to take all those who would hearken unto my words and turn unto the
Lord. I was obedient unto the heavenly commandment, and went forth
among the people, crying repentance unto them, and warning them to
flee from the wrath to come. I preached not alone by precept, but by
my works also. I immediately set to work to construct the ark, and
during the one hundred {369} and twenty years while the ark was being
prepared, I cried aloud and spared not. O, how my soul was grieved when
I beheld the hardness of the hearts of the people, for I knew that God
would not be mocked, that He would not strive with them forever, but
that He would surely destroy them if they did not repent of their sins.

The World:--What success did you meet with, Noah, in your preaching?

Noah:--Practically none. My words seemed to them as idle tales. They
spurned the message which I brought them from their merciful Creator.
They ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they married and were
given in marriage up till the very day that I and my family--eight
souls in all--entered the ark, and the Lord shut the door. Even now, I
fancy I can hear their scoffs and scorns, their mockings and derisions,
as we bade them a last farewell till we would meet them at the judgment
bar of God. Then was the word of the Lord fulfilled, and His righteous
judgments were poured out upon those wicked people and they perished
from the earth. (Gen. 6: 7.) And now, in closing my testimony, I
will say to you, that God has not changed: He is the same yesterday,
today and forever; He does not look upon sin with the least degree of
allowance, and just as sure as God is God, so sure will His judgments
come upon the inhabitants of the earth in these latter-days if they do
not repent and turn from their transgressions. "Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. (Luke 13: 3.)

The World:--That is all, Noah.

Latter-day Saints:--We now most respectfully ask you to listen to the
testimony of another servant of the Lord.

ABRAHAM'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--What is your name?

Abraham:--My name is Abraham.

The World:--Are you prepared to give testimony concerning the matter
which is before us?

Abraham:--I am.

The World:--We will listen to your testimony.

Abraham:--It grieves me to have to report that the inhabitants of the
cities of Sodom and Gomorrah failed to profit by the sad fate which
befell the people in the days of Noah. With the history of the past
before them, showing clearly God's hatred of sin, they added day by
day to the cup of their iniquities. Their abominations at last became
unbearable to the Lord, and He decreed that He would destroy them from
{370} the face of the earth. I shall never forget the day that the Lord
came to me in Mamre and informed me of His intention of destroying the
cities of the plains and the inhabitants thereof. My soul was filled
with sorrow, nevertheless I knew that all the judgments of the Lord
were just. I besought Him to grant me favor in His sight, which He
did. I asked Him if He would spare the city of Sodom provided fifty
righteous souls were found there. He promised me that He would spare
the city if it contained fifty righteous inhabitants. But alas! that
number could not be found. I plead with the Lord again and again, and
He finally consented to turn away His judgments from Sodom if ten
God-fearing persons were found in the city. But ten such persons could
not be found, and the Lord in His anger destroyed the inhabitants of
those wicked cities and thus blotted out their iniquity from before His
face. (Gen. 18: 19.) And as He spared not the cities of the plains,
neither will He spare any other city or nation that forgets God. As
Noah said, so say I, Woe unto the inhabitants of the earth if they do
not repent. Behold, ere they are aware, the Spirit of God will cease to
strive with them, and they shall, by their ungodly deeds, bring upon
themselves swift destruction.

The World:--We have listened with interest to your testimony, Abraham.
You are excused.

Latter-day Saints:--We will now introduce a witness who will show you
the great blessings which came to the people of Nineveh when they
turned from their evil ways and began to work righteousness in the
sight of the Lord.

TESTIMONY OF JONAH.

The World:--What is your name?

Jonah:--My name is Jonah.

The World:--Were you called by the Lord to preach repentance?

Jonah:--I was. The word of the Lord came to me on one occasion, saying:
"Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their
wickedness is come up before me." (Jonah 1: 2.)

The World:--Did you do as the Lord commanded you?

Jonah:--I did not. I went down to Joppa, and there took ship for
Tarshish. The Lord punished me for my disobedience, and then He said
unto me the second time, "Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and
preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee." (Jonah 3: 2.) So I did
as the Lord commanded me. As I entered the city I began to cry aloud,
"Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. So the {371} people
of Nineveh believed God and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth,
from the greatest of them even to the least of them. For word came unto
the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe
from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes. And he
caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree
of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor
flock, taste any thing; let them not feed, nor drink water: but let
man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God:
yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence
that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and
turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? And God saw their
works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the
evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not."
(Jonah 3: 5-10.)

Latter-day Saints:--The next witness whose evidence we desire you to
hear is John, the forerunner of Christ.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN.

The World:--Your name is John?

John:--It is.

The World:--Were you called by the Lord to preach repentance to the
people of your generation?

John:--I was. I was sent before the Lord to prepare His way. I called
upon the people to repent of their sins, for the Kingdom of Heaven was
at hand. (Matt. 3: 1, 2.)

The World:--Were you able to bring many to repentance?

John:--Yes, many people of Judaea and Jerusalem, upon hearing the
proclamation, repented, came forward and confessed their sins, and were
baptized in the river Jordan. (Mark 1: 5.)

The World:--Are we to understand that confession of sins is essential?

John:--Such has been the teaching of the servants of the Lord in every
dispensation. Without confession of sins repentance is incomplete.
Here are the words of the inspired teachers: "He that covereth his
sins shall not prosper, but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall
have mercy." (Prov. 28: 13.) "If we say that we have no sin we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, He
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness." (I John 1: 8, 9.) But confession should be
accompanied with a promise and determination to sin no more. To confess
his sins before God will not {372} benefit a man unless his confession
is accompanied with a determination to sin no more. He must covenant
with the Lord that he is willing to forsake sin, and that in future he
will, with His Divine assistance, yield to no evil, but will shun the
very appearance of it, and keep himself unspotted from the world. God
cannot be deceived, and He will not pardon those who merely confess
their sins, and still make no effort to forsake them.

The World:--Repentance is, therefore, conditional?

John:--It is. Men must be willing to confess their sins and to forsake
them. They must also be willing to forgive others. In fact, Christ told
the people that His Father would not forgive them their trespasses if
they in their hearts failed to forgive those who trespassed against
them. These are His words: "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your
Heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (Matt.
6: 14, 15.) And this forgiveness must be without limit. On one occasion
Peter asked the Lord, "How oft shall my brother sin against me, and I
forgive him, till seven times?" The Master answered, "I say not unto
thee, until seven times; but until seventy times seven." On another
occasion He taught the disciples, saying, "If thy brother trespass
against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him. And if he
trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
turn again to thee saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him." (Luke
17: 3, 4.) Nowhere are repentance, confession and forgiveness more
beautifully portrayed than in Christ's parable of the prodigal son.
After having wasted his substance in riotous living, and being brought
down so low that he had to satisfy his hunger with swine's food, the
prodigal at last came to himself. He thought of his father's home in
which he had spent so many happy years, of the good things of the earth
with which the tables had always been laden, of the hired servants who
waited upon the family. The spirit of repentance entered his heart, and
springing to his feet he exclaimed, "I will arise and go to my father,
and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy
hired servants. * * * But when he was yet a great way off, his father
saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed
him. * * * And the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best
robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his
feet: and bring hither the fatted calf and kill it; {373} and let us
eat, and be merry: for this my sen was dead, and is alive again; he
was lost, and is found." (Luke 15: 18-20, 21-24.) In this parable is
clearly exhibited the love and mercy of God. Verily, he that cometh to
Him shall in nowise be cast out.

The World:--We will excuse the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--This is our case. We believe we have proved most
conclusively that repentance is essential to salvation. "For this ye
know," said the apostle, "that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor
covetous man who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ and of God." (Eph. 5: 5.) The Lord has also said by the mouth of
John the Revelator: "The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable,
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all
liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death." (Rev. 21: 8.) We, therefore,
say unto all men, "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever
a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6: 7.) "We have pointed
out all the prominent principles connected with true repentance. And it
can easily be seen by every honest heart, that God requires mankind to
seek diligently to discern good from evil, and to ascertain what sins
and evils they are guilty of; to be exercised with a Godly sorrow that
they have ever sinned against so great and good a Being as God; to make
suitable confession before God, for all past sins committed; and such a
confession must be accompanied with a solemn covenant or promise to sin
no more; and the heart should be fixed and immovable in this covenant.
All persons who will do these things will have a measure of the Spirit
of Christ resting upon them, imparting humility, and meekness, and
lowliness of heart. But still this repentance does not guarantee to
them a remission of sins; it only prepares the heart to obey properly
a great and holy ordinance which God has instituted expressly for the
remission of sins. We mean the ordinance of baptism."

V.--WATER BAPTISM.

The World:--Do you believe and teach that water baptism is essential to
salvation?

Latter-day Saints:--We do. Water baptism was commanded by the Lord, and
we do not teach people that they can get into the Kingdom of Heaven by
breaking the Lord's commandments.

The World:--Well, we have been taught that baptism is {374} not at all
essential to salvation, that it is simply an outward sign of an inward
grace.

Latter-day Saints:--Baptism was instituted before the foundation of the
world. It is an ordinance of the everlasting Gospel, and by obedience
to that ordinance, coupled with faith, and sincere repentance, the Lord
has promised mankind a remission of their sins. "We have the testimony
of many eminent writers that baptism was practiced by the Jews, as a
religious ceremony, ages anterior to the birth of our Savior. It is
said that the Jews not only circumcised, but baptized all new converts
to their faith; and that in the days of Solomon great numbers were
proselyted from the surrounding nations, and were baptized. It is by
some supposed that the Jews, before Christ, did not baptize those of
Jewish descent, but only such as were proselyted from foreign nations.
But it is certain that baptism was administered, under the law of
Moses, unto numerous multitudes of Jews; for John the Baptist, who was
the legal heir of the Aaronic Priesthood, through the lineage of his
fathers, did administer this rite to thousands of the Jews for the
remission of their sins; and this, too, at a time when the law of Moses
was in full force. Even Jesus Himself had not yet been baptized. None
of the old institution was yet abolished; and no new institutions were,
as yet, introduced. And while under the strictest obligations to keep
the old law, John was baptizing; and there went out to him Jerusalem
and all Judaea, and all the region round about Jordan, and were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins." (Matt. 3: 5, 6.) We
ask you to hear the testimony of Paul on this subject.

The World:--We will be pleased to hear the Apostle's evidence.

PAUL'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--Paul, did you teach the people that water baptism was
practiced by the Israelites before the days of John the Baptist?

Paul:--I did. Water baptism is one of the ordinances of the Gospel--the
true Gospel, which embraces one Lord, one faith and one baptism. That
Gospel was preached to the people in the days of Abraham; and also
to the Israelites under Moses. Have you not read what I wrote to the
Galatians, the Hebrews and the Corinthians concerning this matter? I
quote from my epistles: "And the scripture, foreseeing that God would
justify the heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed." (Gal. 3: 8.)
"For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well {375} as unto them: but
the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in
them that heard it." (Heb. 4: 2.) "Moreover, brethren, I would not that
ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud,
and all passed through the sea; _and were all baptized unto Moses in
the cloud and in the sea_." (I Cor. 10: 1, 2.)

The World:--Paul, you have clearly proved the antiquity of baptism. We
will excuse you for the present.

Latter-day Saints:--We can prove to you beyond the possibility of doubt
that water baptism is essential to man's salvation. As you know, nearly
all the Christian sects believe in and practice some form of baptism,
but, with two or three exceptions, none of them believe that that
ordinance aids, even in the slightest degree, in the salvation of the
souls of men. This is a mistake. Baptism is one of the first ordinances
of the Gospel, and is as essential to man's salvation as any other
ordinance that God has ever revealed.

The World:--We are ready to hear your witnesses on this matter.

Latter-day Saints:--The first witness that we will introduce is John
the Baptist.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN.

The World:--Your name is John?

John:--It is.

The World:--You told us on a former occasion that you were called of
God to go before Christ and prepare His way.

John:--That is correct. You will find it so recorded in John's Gospel.
(John 1: 6.)

The World:--What did God command you to preach to the people?

John:--Repentance and water baptism.

The World:--You say that God sent you to baptize with water?

John:--He did. It is recorded in the scriptures: "And I knew him not:
but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon
whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the
same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." (John 1: 33.)

The World:--What did you tell the people was the object of water
baptism?

John:--I told them that it was for the remission of sins. Mark and Luke
bear me witness. The former says: "John did baptize in the wilderness,
and preach the baptism of repentance for the remissions of sins." (Mark
1: 4.) Luke {376} says: "And he came into all the country about Jordan,
preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." (Luke
3: 3.)

The World:--After what manner did you baptize?

John:--As I was commanded by the Lord--by immersion. I took the
repentant believers down to the river Jordan, and there I baptized them
by immersing them in the water.

The World:--Then you do not believe in infant sprinkling?

John:--I do not. It is contrary to the teaching of Christ and His
Apostles. There was but one form of baptism known to them, that was
baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. On one occasion when
people applied to me for baptism, I had to take them to Aenon, near
to Salim, "_because there was much water there_." (John 3: 23.) Had I
considered sprinkling just as acceptable to God as immersion, I would
not have taken the people to Aenon to be baptized.

The World:--You baptized Jesus Christ?

John:--I did.

The World:--When Christ applied to you for baptism what did you say?

John:--I said, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou
to me?" Then Jesus said to me, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it
becometh us to fulfill all righteousness." (Matt. 3: 14, 15.)

The World:--You say that Christ requested you to baptize Him in order
that He might fulfill all righteousness?

John:--He did. And if the Son of God, being holy, had need to be
baptized with water that He might fulfill all righteousness, how much
more need have mortal men, they being unholy, to be baptized? According
to the words of the Savior a man cannot fulfill all righteousness if he
fails to comply with the ordinance of baptism. I told the Pharisees and
lawyers that they had rejected the counsel of God against themselves by
not being baptized. (Luke 7: 30.) And as it was in those days, so it is
today--all those who slight this command of the Lord, and refuse to be
baptized by immersion for the remission of their sins, will, like the
Pharisees and lawyers, reject the counsel of God against themselves.

The World:--The witness is excused. (To the Latter-day Saints.) When
was the method of baptism changed?

Latter-day Saints:--In the third century after Christ, in the case of a
man named Novatian. Gahan, a Catholic historian, writing of him, says:
"Having embraced the faith, he continued a catechumen, till, falling
dangerously ill, and {377} his life being despaired of, he was baptized
in bed, not by immersion, which was then the usual method, but by
infusion, or pouring on of water."

The World:--Who is your next witness?

Latter-day Saints:--Our next witness is the Jewish ruler Nicodemus.

TESTIMONY OF NICODEMUS.

The World:--Nicodemus, had you an interview with Christ?

Nicodemus:--I had. I called upon Him one night and said to Him, "Rabbi,
we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these
miracles that thou doest except God be with him." (John 3: 2.)

The World:--What did Christ say in reply?

Nicodemus:--He told me that I would have to be born again--born of
water and of the Spirit. He spoke most emphatically concerning this
matter, saying, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, _except a man be born
of water and of the Spirit_, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God."
(John 3: 5.)

The World:--What did you interpret the words "born of the water and of
the Spirit" to mean?

Nicodemus:--I interpreted them to mean the baptism of water and of the
Holy Spirit. Christ was born of the water and of the Spirit when He was
baptized; His disciples were born of the water and of the Spirit, and
the Savior declared that except a man receive this new birth he cannot
enter the Kingdom of God.

The World:--We have been taught that the water which Jesus spoke of was
the word of God.

Nicodemus:--He did not tell me that. I am sure that if Christ had meant
the word of God He would have said so. Christ did not say one thing and
mean another. Why should men put false sentiments into the mouth of the
Son of God? That you may see the absurdity of this interpretation which
men have put upon the words of Christ, I will make a few quotations
from the scriptures, substituting the words "word of God" for the
word "water": "And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway
out of the word of God." "And John was baptizing in Aenon near to
Salim, because there were much words of God there." "And he commanded
the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into the word of
God. * * * And when they were come up out of the word of God." u Then
answered Peter, Can any man forbid the word of God, that these should
not be baptized." {378} "That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of the word of God by the word."

The World:--This certainly makes the interpretation appear most
absured. But, do you consider water baptism essential to salvation?

Nicodemus:--I do, most assuredly. I am aware that this doctrine sounds
as strange to the people in these days as it did at first to me. But
it is, nevertheless, true. It was not Christ's doctrine, it was the
doctrine of the Father who had sent Him, and who had sent John also
with a similar message. "My doctrine is not mine," said the Savior,
"but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of
the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself."
(John 7: 16, 17.) Again He said, "For I have not spoken of myself;
but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment what I should
say and what I should speak. And I know that his commandment is life
everlasting; whatsoever I speak, therefore, even as the Father said
unto me, so I speak." (John 12: 49, 50.) Therefore, when Christ
impressed upon me the necessity of a new birth, of the water and of
the Spirit, He taught me a commandment which He had received from His
Father, and which He said was life everlasting. I am surprised that
anyone possessed of ordinary intelligence could think for a moment that
God, the fountain of all truth and wisdom, would send His Son down
to the earth to teach the children of men ordinances which were not
necessary for them to observe. Nor can I think of anything more foolish
than for Christ to send out missionaries into the world to teach people
to observe an ordinance, which, when they had obeyed it, they were no
better off than they were before. How dare anyone charge the Almighty
with such folly?

The World:--We have no further questions to ask the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--Our next witness is the Apostle Peter.

PETER'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--Were you commissioned by the Lord Jesus Christ to preach
His Gospel?

Peter:--I was. In sending His Apostles forth to preach the Gospel, the
Lord said unto them, "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you:
and {379} lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world."
(Matt. 28: 19, 20.)

The World:--Baptism is, therefore, a commandment of the Lord?

Peter:--It is, and Christ has said, that he that breaks one of the
least of His commandments and teaches men to do so, the same shall be
called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. (Matt. 5: 19.)

The World:--Do you believe water baptism to be essential to man's
salvation?

Peter:--I do. If it had not been so considered by Christ, He would
not have commanded us to preach it. Why send us out to tell people
to observe an ordinance of the Gospel which it mattered not with God
whether they observed or not? That would not give the Lord credit for
possessing as much intelligence as men; for no man among you would
command his servants to do a certain work when it mattered not whether
it was done or left undone. If baptism is not essential to salvation,
then it was needless on the part of Christ to command His Apostles
to preach it. It was a waste of time for us to do so, for while we
were preaching baptism and administering the ordinances we could have
employed the time in preaching principles which are essential to men's
salvation. You will observe, Christ told us to baptize the people in
the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Now,
do you think for a moment that we would have used the names of the
Holy Trinity in an ordinance in which there was no profit? Did Christ
not know that it was written in the Scriptures, "Thou shalt not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that taketh his name in vain." If you say that baptism is not
essential to salvation, you make the Savior of the world a transgressor
of God's holy commandment, for what could be more vain than to use
the names of the Holy Trinity in an ordinance in which there were no
virtue, no salvation?

The World:--You, therefore, taught the people that it was necessary for
them to be baptized?

Peter:--I did. With the rest of the Apostles I stood up on the day of
Pentecost before a great multitude of people and declared unto them the
message of life and salvation which Christ had given us to deliver. We
spoke under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and thousands of people
were pricked in their hearts, and cried out saying, "Men and brethren,
what shall we do?"

The World:--What did you tell them?

{380} Peter:--I said unto them, "Repent and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ _for the remission of sins_, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2: 38.) The same
day three thousand souls were added to the Church. There was a most
devout man named Cornelius, who resided in Caesarea, who prayed to God
constantly and gave much alms to the people. His prayers and alms came
up as a memorial before God, and He sent an angel to Cornelius to tell
him to send for me to Joppa, and that I would tell him words whereby
he and his house should be saved. Now, you will remember, that a short
time previous to this I had taught thousands of people baptism for the
remission of sins. If I had taught them false doctrine do you think the
Lord would have sent an angel to Cornelius to advise him to send for me
to teach him the plan of salvation? I told Cornelius the same things
that I declared to the people on the day of Pentecost, and commanded
him and his household to be baptized in the name of the Lord. (Acts 10:
48.)

The World:--That is all, Peter.

Latter-day Saints:--We now submit for your consideration the testimony
of the Apostle Paul.

PAUL'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--What is your belief concerning water baptism?

Paul:--I believe and have taught that it is an essential ordinance of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. When Jesus appeared to me on the way to
Damascus, He called me to repentance and told me to go into Damascus
and that I would there be told of all things that were commanded of me
to do. The Lord then instructed His servant Ananias to go to me and
to tell me to _arise and be baptised and wash away my sins_, calling
on the name of the Lord. (Acts 22: 16.) So, you see, baptism for the
remission of sins is not my doctrine, but the Lord's. So important is
this ordinance in the sight of the Eternal Father that He withheld the
Holy Ghost from twelve devout Ephesians until I had re-baptized them.
They had been baptized previously, but not by one holding authority
from God, and so their baptism was not valid in His sight. How dare I
teach the children of men that baptism is not essential to salvation
when He who spake as never man spake had declared, "Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God."

The World:--We will excuse the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--We have adduced enough evidence to {381} convince
every fair-minded person that water baptism is essential to his
salvation. We have shown that it was instituted by the Lord from the
beginning of the world for the remission of sins. The Israelites
received the ordinance under the hands of Moses, and were all baptized
in the cloud and in the sea. John, the forerunner of Messiah, was sent
by God to _preach baptism for the remission of sins_. He baptized
multitudes of people in the river Jordan _for the remission of their
sins_. Christ the Son of God received baptism at the hands of John in
order that He, too, might _fulfill all righteousness_. Jesus told the
Jewish ruler that except a man were _born of water and of the Spirit_
he could not enter the Kingdom of God. He commanded His disciples to
"Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost." Peter, while preaching under the
influence of the Holy Ghost, told the people on the day of Pentecost to
repent and _be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission
of their sins_. The Lord Himself sent Ananias to Saul of Tarsus to
tell him to arise and _be baptised and wash away his sins_. We preach
the same doctrine that was taught by Christ and His Apostles, and say
unto you, "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ, _for the remission of sins_, and ye shall receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost."

VI.--THE HOLY GHOST.

The World (to the Latter-day Saints):--According to the doctrine of
your Church a man must be born of water and of the Spirit before he can
enter the Kingdom of God.

Latter-day Saints:--In this we simply reiterate what Jesus said to the
anxious Jewish ruler, Nicodemus. These are His words: "Verily, verily,
I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." (John 3: 5.) These are the words
of the Son of God, and whenever He speaks all discussion should be
closed.

The World:--You explained to us in the last examination that being born
of the water means being baptized in water: what are we to understand
by being born of the Spirit?

Latter-day Saints:--To be born of the Spirit means to be baptized with
the Holy Ghost. All men must receive these two baptisms before they can
become the sons of God. By being born of the flesh we become the sons
of men: by being born of the water and of the Spirit we become the sons
of God. We desire you to hear the testimony of John the Baptist on this
important matter.

{382}

TESTIMONY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

The World:--John, you told us on two former occasions that you were
sent of God to prepare the way for His Only Begotten Son. What did you
teach the people they had to do in order to be accepted of the Lord and
admitted into His Kingdom?

John:--I told them that they would have to repent, and be baptized in
water for the remission of their sins. I promised the people that, if
they would do these things, when Christ would come He would baptize
them with a higher baptism--the baptism of the Holy Ghost and of fire.
(Matt. 3: 11.)

The World:--You baptized the Christ?

John:--I did. The ordinance was performed in the river Jordan. As soon
as Jesus came up out of the water the heavens were opened and the
Spirit of God descended like a dove and rested upon Him, and then was
heard the voice of God out of heaven, saying, "Thou art my beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased." (Mark 1: 9-11.) Thus was Jesus born of the
water and of the Spirit, and all men must follow the example of the
Redeemer of the world if they expect to become heirs of God and joint
heirs with Jesus Christ.

The World:--Did you promise the Holy Ghost to all those whom you
baptized?

John:--I did. I said to them, "I indeed baptize you with water unto
repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes
I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and
with fire." (Matt. 3: 11.)

The World:--You are excused, John.

Latter-day Saints:--Our next witness is the Apostle John.

TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE JOHN.

The World:--You are an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ?

John:--I am.

The World:--John the Baptist promised those who believed in Christ and
who had repented and been baptized for the remission of their sins that
the Messiah would baptize them with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Did
you receive that higher baptism?

John:--I did, but not until Christ had fulfilled His mission and
had returned to His Father. While the Savior was with us He was our
Teacher, our Guide and our Comforter; but when He ascended up on high
we received from the Father the other Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who
was to {383} abide within us forever. During His sojourn with us, Jesus
referred quite often to the Divine Spirit which His Father would confer
upon us after His departure. On different occasions He said to us: "But
the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." (John 14: 26.) "But when
the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify
of me." (John 15: 26.) "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come,
he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself;
but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you
things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and
shall show it unto you." (John 16: 13, 14.) "And when they bring you
unto the synagogues, and unto the magistrates, and powers, take ye no
thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: for
the Holy Ghost shall teach you in that same hour what ye ought to say.
(Luke 12: 11, 12.) "Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient
for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you." (John 16:
7.) "And, behold, I send the promise of my Father unto you: but tarry
ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on
high." (Luke 24: 49.)

The World:--How was the Holy Ghost conferred upon the people?

John:--Through prayer and by the imposition of hands.

The World:--Did you receive the Holy Ghost in this manner?

John:--I did, and so did the rest of the Apostles. Jesus said to us,
"And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you forever." (John 14: 16.) He led us out as
far as Bethany, where He lifted up His hands and blessed us; He then
breathed on us, and said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost." (Luke 24: 50;
John 20: 22.)

The World:--That is all, John.

Latter-day Saints:--Our next witness, the Apostle Peter, is ready to be
examined.

The World:--We will listen to his testimony.

PETER TESTIFIES.

The World:--Did you also receive from Christ the promise of the Holy
Ghost?

{384} Peter:--I did. After His resurrection, the Lord appeared to us as
we were assembled together, and commanded us that we should not depart
from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, "which," said
He, "ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water; but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." (Acts 1: 4,
5.)

The World:--When did you receive the gift of the Holy Ghost?

Peter:--On the day of Pentecost. The Apostles were assembled together,
and suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty
wind, and it rilled all the house where we were sitting. And there
appeared unto us cloven tongues like of as fire, and it sat upon each
of us. And we were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak
with other tongues, as the Spirit gave us utterance. (Acts 2: 2-4.)

The World:--Were the Apostles the only ones who received the Holy Ghost?

Peter:--They were not. The Lord is not a respecter of persons; in every
nation he that feareth God and keepeth His commandments is accepted of
Him. John assured all his baptized converts that they would receive
the baptism of the Holy Ghost. After being endowed with the Divine
Spirit, the Apostles stood up before a great multitude of people and
bore witness of the resurrection of Christ. Thousands of people, on
beholding the glorious outpouring of the Holy Ghost, and perceiving the
power by which we spake, were pricked in their hearts, and cried out,
"Men and brethren, what shall we do?" This is what I said unto them,
"Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts
2: 38, 39.)

The World:--Did Christ give you authority to confer the Holy Ghost upon
those who believed on your words and obeyed the Gospel?

Peter:--He did, and also to the other Apostles. He said to us: "But ye
shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye
shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Acts 1: 8.) After
His resurrection the Lord appeared unto us and commissioned us to go
forth and preach the Gospel. "Go ye into all the world," said He, "and
preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved; but he that {385} believeth not shall be damned. And
these signs shall follow them that believe; in my name they shall cast
out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them;
they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover." (Mark 16:
15-18.)

The World:--Did the people who accepted the Gospel of Christ in the
days of your ministry receive the gift of the Holy Ghost?

Peter:--They did. The Lord confirmed the words of His servants by
pouring out His Holy Spirit upon those who repented of their sins and
who were baptized by Divine authority for the remission of their sins.

The World:--How was the Holy Ghost conferred?

Peter:--By prayer and by the imposition of the hands of authorized
servants of God.

The World:--Can you refer us to an occasion when the Holy Ghost was
given to believers?

Peter:--On one occasion Philip went down to Samaria and preached the
Gospel to the inhabitants of that city. "And the people with one accord
gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and seeing the
miracles which he did. For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice,
came out of many that were possessed with them; and many taken with
palsies, and that were lame, were healed. * * * When they believed
Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the
name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women." (Acts
8: 5-7, 12.) While Philip had authority to preach the Gospel, and also
to baptize, he did not have authority to confer the Holy Ghost. He,
therefore, sent word to the Apostles at Jerusalem, acquainting them of
the work which he had performed in Samaria, and requesting them to send
men endowed with higher authority, to confirm the baptized converts and
to pray for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost. John and I
were sent down to Samaria, and when we met with the converts there we
prayed for them, after which we laid our hands upon them, and the Holy
Ghost came upon them. (Acts 8: 14-17.)

The World:--We will now excuse you, Peter.

The World:--We have been taught that the signs spoken of by Peter
were only to follow the Apostles and the believers in that age; that
they were given to assist in establishing Christianity; and that when
Christianity became established they were done away with and were no
longer needed.

Latter-day Saints: We know that that is the teaching of {386} professed
ministers of the Gospel, but it is in direct opposition to the teaching
of Christ and His Apostles. "Christ places His preaching, believing,
salvation, and the signs that were to follow, all on an equal
footing; where one was limited, the other must be; where one ceased,
the other did. If the language limits the signs to the Apostles, it
limits salvation to them also. If no others were to have these signs
follow them then no others were to believe, and no others were to
be saved. If the language limits these signs to the first age or
ages of Christianity, then it limits salvation to the first ages of
Christianity, for one is as precisely as much limited as the other;
and where one is in force, the other is; and where one ends, the other
must stop. As well might we say, preaching of the Gospel is no longer
needed; neither faith nor salvation; these were only given at first to
establish the Gospel, as to say, the signs are no longer necessary,
they were only given at first to establish the Gospel."

The World--We will now excuse you, Peter.

Latter-day Saints:--We have another witness, the Apostle Paul.

The World:--We are ready to hear his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL.

The World:--Paul, after your conversion did you receive the gift of the
Holy Ghost?

Paul--I did. Ananias, being sent of the Lord, came to me in Damascus,
and placing his hands upon me, said: "Brother Saul, the Lord, even
Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou earnest, has sent
me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy
Ghost." (Acts 9: 17.)

The World:--Did anyone ever receive the Holy Ghost under your
administration?

Paul:--Yes, many. On one occasion, while Apollos was at Corinth, I
passed through the upper coasts and came to Ephesus. There I found
certain disciples who told me that they had been baptized. I asked
them if they had received the Holy Ghost since they believed, and they
answered that they had not--that they had not even heard of the Holy
Ghost. I asked them with what baptism they had been baptized, and they
replied, "Unto John's baptism." I told them that John verily baptized
with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should
believe on Him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.
When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
I {387} then laid my hands upon them and prayed for them that the
Lord would bestow upon them His Holy Spirit. The Lord hearkened unto
my prayer and acknowledged my administration, for the Holy Ghost came
upon them and they spake with tongues and prophesied. (Acts 19: 1-6.)
Timothy also received this precious gift by the laying on of my hands.
(II Tim. 1: 6.)

The World:--How does the Holy Ghost operate upon those who receive it?

Paul:--In divers ways. "There are diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to
another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by
the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;
to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another
discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another
the interpretation of tongues; but all these worketh that one and
the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will." (I
Cor. 12: 4-11.) All these gifts, and many others, were enjoyed by the
primitive Christians, and were inseparably connected with the true
Gospel of Christ.

The World:--Did you not write an epistle to the Corinthian saints in
which you told them that the gifts of prophecy, tongues, etc., would
cease?

Paul:--I did. I told them that such gifts would cease when that which
is perfect should come. I read from my epistle: "Charity never faileth:
but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be
tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish
away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which
is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. * *
* For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I
know in part; but then shall I know even as I am known." (I Cor. 13:
8-10, 12.) I wrote an epistle to the Ephesians, in which I told them
that the spiritual gifts which Christ had placed in His Church were to
continue "_till we all come to the unity of the faith_." The following
is an extract from my epistle: "Wherefore he saith, when he ascended
up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men." "And
he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and
some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we
all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of {388} the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fulness of Christ." (Eph. 4: 8, 11-13.)

The World:--The witness is excused. (To the Latter-day Saints):--Do the
members of your Church enjoy the gifts of the Holy Ghost?

Latter-day Saints:--They do. "We believe in the gifts of the Holy Ghost
being enjoyed now as much as they were in the days of the Apostles;
we believe that the revelations of the Holy Ghost are necessary to
organize the Priesthood; that no man can be called to fill any office
in the ministry without it; we also believe in prophecy, in tongues, in
visions, in revelations, in healings; and that these things cannot be
enjoyed without the Holy Ghost; we believe that holy men of old spake
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and that holy men in these days
speak by the same power; we believe in its being a comforter and a
witness-bearer; that it brings things past to our remembrance, leads us
into all truth, and shows us of things to come; we believe that no man
can know that Jesus is the Christ but by the Holy Ghost."

The World:--Have you received authority from the Lord to confer the
Holy Ghost upon those who comply with the laws and ordinances of the
Gospel?

Latter-day Saints:--We have. The authority was conferred upon Joseph
Smith and Oliver Cowdery by the Apostles Peter, James and John.

The World:--Have the gifts of the Holy Ghost been made manifest in this
dispensation?

Latter-day Saints:--They have. On the evening of March 27th, 1836,
Joseph Smith met the quorums of the Priesthood in the Kirtland Temple
and instructed them respecting the ordinance of the washing of
feet, and in relation to the spirit of prophecy. He called upon the
congregation to speak, and not to fear to prophesy good concerning
the Saints; "for if you prophesy," said he, "the falling of these
hills, and the rising of the valleys, the downfall of the enemies of
Zion, and the rising of the Kingdom of God, it shall come to pass. Do
not quench the Spirit, for the first one that shall open his mouth
shall receive the Spirit of prophecy." Brother George A. Smith arose,
and began to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a
rushing mighty wind, which filled the temple, and all the congregation
simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many
began to speak in tongues, and prophesy; others saw glorious visions;
and the Temple was filled with angels, which fact the Prophet declared
to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood {389} came running
together, hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light
like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple, and were astonished at
what was transpiring." (Compendium pp. 267-8.)

The World:--Do you promise the Holy Ghost to all those who repent and
obey the Gospel which you preach?

Latter-day Saints:--We do. In sending forth His servants in these last
days to proclaim the glad tidings of the Gospel of peace, the Lord
said: "Therefore go ye into all the world, and whatsoever place ye
cannot go into ye shall send, that the testimony may go from you into
all the world unto every creature. And as I said unto mine apostles,
even so I say unto you, for you are mine apostles, even God's high
priests; ye are they whom my Father hath given me--ye are my friends;
therefore, as I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that
every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for
the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost; and these signs
shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall do many wonderful
works; in my name they shall cast out devils; in my name they shall
heal the sick; in my name they shall open the eyes of the blind,
and unstop the ears of the deaf; and the tongue of the dumb shall
speak; and if any man shall administer poison unto them it shall not
hurt them; and the poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm
them. But a commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast
themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world, for
these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation.
Verily, verily I say unto you, they who believe not on your words,
and are not baptized in water, in my name, for the remission of their
sins, that they may receive the Holy Ghost, shall be damned, and shall
not come into my Father's Kingdom, where my Father and I am. And this
revelation unto you, and commandment, is in force from this very hour
upon all the world, and the gospel is unto all who have not received
it." (Doc. and Cov. 84: 62-75.) All who will, with honest hearts,
receive the message which we bear--the message that God the Father has
in these last days restored through the ministration of angels, the
everlasting Gospel--shall receive a testimony by the manifestations of
the Holy Spirit of its Divine authenticity. And these manifestations
shall be such as to give them perfect knowledge of its truth.

VII. BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD.

Latter-day Saints:--Before proceeding further, permit us {390} to ask
you a question or two: Have we not proved, and that, too, beyond all
controversy, that a living, active and abiding faith in God the Father,
and in His Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, is indispensable to man's
salvation?

The World:--You have shown that, in order for a man to please God, not
to mention being saved of Him, he must have faith in Him, and in His
Son Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world.

Latter-day Saints:--Have we not proven most conclusively that men must
repent of their sins and turn away from their iniquities before they
can gain access to the Kingdom of God?

The World:--Sufficient evidence has been given to prove that sincere
and genuine repentance must be exhibited in the lives of all men who
hope for salvation, for the decree has gone forth that no unclean thing
can enter the Kingdom of Heaven.

Latter-day Saints:--Have we not proven that the proper mode of baptism
is immersion, and that the object of baptism is for the remission of
sins?

The World:--The testimony of your witnesses in regard to the mode,
object and essentiality of baptism cannot be refuted. Christ's answer
to Nicodemus--"Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he
cannot enter the Kingdom of God"--should put an end to all discussion
on that subject.

Latter-day Saints:--Have we not proven that after a man has complied
with the ordinance of baptism, he must receive the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of the hands of authorized servants of God?

The World:--Such was the practice in the primitive church. After
baptism the Apostles confirmed the believers by the laying on of hands,
with prayer, and conferring the Holy Ghost.

Latter-day Saints:--These are the first principles of the Gospel of
Christ, and the Apostle Paul has declared that "though we, or an angel
from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed." (Gal. 1: 8.)

The World:--You have laid before us in a most clear and convincing
manner the plan of salvation. Permit us now to ask you, What is to
become of those who have died in ignorance of the Gospel of Christ?

Latter-day Saints:--Our reply to that question is this: God is a
God of mercy and justice. He does not seek a crop where there has
been no seed sown. All those who have died {391} in ignorance of the
Gospel are in the hands of Him whose nature and whose name is Love,
whose desire is that all His children may be saved and brought to a
knowledge of the truth. He has made provision whereby the glad tidings
of great joy which the angel brought to the shepherds on the morning
of the Savior's birth shall be proclaimed unto every son and daughter
of God. The Creator has made of one blood all nations that dwell on
the earth. There is no respect of persons with God. His glorious plan
of redemption was not revealed for the benefit of a favored class.
When the angel of the Lord appeared to the shepherds on the plains of
Judaea, he said unto them, "Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great
joy, which shall be to _all_ people." (Luke 2: 10.) Now, it is an
undisputed fact that millions had died before that time without having
heard those good tidings, just as millions have died since whose ears
have never been saluted with the good news of the Savior's birth, and
of the great redemption which He purchased for the whole human family
by the shedding of His most precious blood. Who could be so lost to all
reason as to think for a moment that God would consign to everlasting
punishment all those who died in absolute ignorance of His Divine laws?
We now ask you, as Paul asked the Roman saints, "How then shall they
call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe
in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher?" (Rom. 10: 14.) But here is the Apostle Peter, a recognized
authority on the doctrine of Christ. Hear what he has to say in the
subject.

TESTIMONY OF PETER.

The World:--Peter, would you have us believe that the Gospel is
preached to those who die in ignorance of its Divine truths?

Peter:--I am surprised to hear you ask such a question when so much has
been written on the matter. Jesus Christ came, not to save the living
only, but the dead also. He declared that if He were lifted up from the
earth He would draw _all_ men unto Him, (John 12: 32), and that the
hour was coming when the dead, as well as the living, would hear His
voice. (John 5: 25.)

The World:--Then, according to your testimony, Christ after having
preached the Gospel to men in the flesh, went also and preached the
same Gospel to those who had died without having heard of its saving
principles?

Peter:--He did; and not to them only, but also to those {392} who
rejected it when it was preached to them on the earth.

The World:--This is certainly strange doctrine to us. Our ministers
have never taught us that the dead could be saved as well as the living.

Peter:--That is because they do not understand the Scriptures. The men
who wrote the Scriptures wrote as they were moved upon by the Holy
Ghost, and in order for men to understand the writings of the prophets
and other inspired servants of God, they must be in possession of the
same Spirit, for "the things of God knoweth no man but by the Spirit
of God." If you will permit me, I will endeavor to make the Scriptures
plain to your understanding. Noah, as you all know, was a preacher of
righteousness. He was called by the Lord to preach the Gospel to the
people of his generation. But they refused to listen to his warning;
they turned deaf ears to his entreaties, and at last the Lord came out
in judgment upon them and destroyed them from the face of the earth.
But did He then cast them off forever? No, indeed. The Lord does not
keep His anger forever. He had prepared a place for them, for in His
house there are many mansions. He had prepared a prison-house for the
wicked and rebellious, and when the antediluvians were destroyed in the
flesh, their spirits were shut up in the Lord's prison-house, where
they were kept for thousands of years, or in other words, till they had
paid the uttermost farthing.

The World:--And did those people have the opportunity afterwards of
again hearing the Gospel?

Peter:--I am coming to that. I told you those spirits were shut up in
prison for thousands of years. Now, I do not ask you to accept of my
testimony alone concerning this matter. I am going to read to you what
Isaiah the Prophet has written concerning the Lord's prison-house and
its inmates. Here are his words: "And they shall be gathered together,
as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the
prison, and after many days shall they be visited." (Isaiah 24: 22.)
Now, let us stop for a moment and analyze this Scripture. There is a
depth of meaning in it, I assure you. Writing was not done with such
ease in Isaiah's time as it is today. The prophet did not pen the words
which I have read just for pastime--they were written for our profit
and learning. He pointed out most clearly the fate of those who would
not hearken to the voice of the Lord or of His servants, but spent the
days of their probation in gratifying their carnal appetites. They
were to be gathered together as prisoners, and shut up in a prison,
where they were to be {393} confined for many days. But they were not
to be left without hope. The promise was made that when they had paid
the penalty for their misdeeds they would be visited. This, according
to the words of the prophet was part of Christ's missionary work: He
was to preach redemption not only to the living, but to the dead as
well; He was to visit the prisoners in the prison-house and preach
deliverance to them. I quote again from his writings: "I the Lord
have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will
keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of
the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from
the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison-house."
(Isaiah 42: 6, 7.) Now, I desire to remind you that Christ confirmed
this prophecy of Isaiah. He told the people that it referred to Him,
and that it would be fulfilled in Him. Standing up in the synagogue in
Nazareth one Sabbath day He quoted Isaiah's prophecy, as follows: "The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach
the Gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted,
to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord." (Luke 4: 18, 19.) So, you see that part
of Christ's work was to preach deliverance to the captives, and open
the prison to those who were bound.

The World:--When did the Messiah perform that work?

Peter:--During the three days that His body lay in the tomb.

The World:--Was His Spirit not with His Father during that time?

Peter:--According to Christ's own testimony it was not. When the Lord
appeared to Mary, after His resurrection, He told her to touch Him
not, for He had not yet ascended to His Father. (John 20: 17.) In two
epistles which I wrote to the Saints in early days I made special
reference to Christ's visit to the spirits in prison. This is what I
said: "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh,
but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went and preached unto
the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the
longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a
preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (I
Peter 3: 18-20.) "For for this cause was the Gospel preached also to
them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the
flesh, {394} but live according to God in the spirit." (I Peter 4: 6.)
While this doctrine may be strange to you, it was quite well understood
by the Saints in former days.

The World:--We thank you, Peter, for your testimony.

Latter-day Saints:--Before calling another witness we will quote to you
the comments of Professor A. Hinderkoper, a German writer, and Bishop
Alford, on the words of Peter. The former says: "In the second and
third centuries every branch and division of the Christian Church, so
far as their records enable us to judge, believed that Christ preached
to the departed spirits." (Haley's Discrepancies of the Bible.) Bishop
Alford says: "I understand these words (I Peter 3: 19) to say that our
Lord in his disembodied state, did go to the place of detention of
departed spirits, and did there announce His work of redemption; preach
salvation in fact, to the disembodied spirits of those who refused to
obey the voice of God when the judgment of the flood was hanging over
them." We now respectfully ask you to listen to what the Apostle Paul
has to say on this matter.

PAUL'S EVIDENCE.

The World:--Paul, do you believe that the Gospel is preached to men
after they depart this life?

Paul:--I do. I corroborate all that the Apostle Peter has said
concerning salvation for the dead. This doctrine was well understood by
the people in our day. Jesus, you remember, told Nicodemus that except
a man were born of water and of the Spirit, he could not enter the
Kingdom of God. Now, in those days the people asked the same question
that many people ask today, "If baptism is essential to salvation, what
is to become of those who have died without having been baptized?"
Had the Lord failed to make provision for such people, it would have
revealed an imperfection in the plan of salvation, which is not the
case, for "the law of the Lord is perfect." Peter has told you that the
Gospel was preached to the dead; I taught the people the doctrine of
baptism for the dead. Here is what I wrote to the Corinthians: "Else
what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise
not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (I Cor. 15: 20.)
The Saints in former times believed in and performed a vicarious work
for the dead--they were baptized for their dead. But after the death of
the Apostles men transgressed the laws and changed the ordinances of
the Gospel, in consequence of which darkness covers the earth and gross
darkness the minds of the people.

{395} The World:--You are excused, Paul.

Latter-day Saints (to the World):--We desire to call your attention
to a prophecy which was made by Malachi. He prophesied as follows:
"Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the
great and dreadful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of
the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their
fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." (Mal. 4: 5,
6.) Now, we testify to you, in all soberness, that this prophecy has
been literally fulfilled. On the 3rd day of April, 1836, the Prophet
Elijah appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland
Temple. Addressing them he said: "Behold, the time has fully come,
which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi; testifying that I should
be sent before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come, to turn
the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the
fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse. Therefore the
keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands, and by this
ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even
at the doors." We have built a number of temples, in which baptism and
other ordinances have been performed in behalf of millions of our dead
relatives and friends. This is also in fulfillment of the prophecy of
Micah, who said: "But in the last days it shall come to pass, that
the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top
of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people
shall flow unto it. And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and
let us go up the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God
of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem." (Micah 4: 1, 2.) The work for the dead is still in
progress. The hearts of the fathers are being turned to the children,
and the hearts of the children to the fathers. Blessed are all those
who engage in this glorious work, for great shall be their joy when
they meet their loved ones who have passed beyond the veil, and for
whom they stood as saviors upon Mount Zion.

VIII.--DIVINE AUTHORITY.

The World (to the Latter-day Saints):--Do you claim to have received
authority from the Lord to preach the Gospel and administer in the
ordinances thereof?

Latter-day Saints:--We do. The Lord has in these last days restored,
through the ministering of angels, both the {396} Aaronic and
Melchisedek Priesthood, empowering His servants to preach the Gospel,
baptize repentant believers for the remission of their sins, confirm
them members in His Church, and by prayer and the imposition of hands
call down upon them the Holy Ghost.

The World:--Must a man be called of God and divinely appointed before
he can preach acceptably the Gospel of Jesus Christ and administer its
ordinances?

Latter-day Saints:--He must, as the Apostle Paul and others will
testify.

#TESTIMONY OF PAUL. # The World:--Paul, do you consider it
absolutely necessary in order for a man to preach the Gospel and
administer in its ordinances, for him to be called of God and ordained
by those holding Divine authority?

Paul:--I do. In every dispensation of the world the Lord has chosen
certain men to represent Him among the people. These He called, either
by His own voice or by the voice of His servants whom He had previously
chosen.

The World:--Can you cite us a few examples of the calling of men to the
ministry?

Paul:--I can. The Lord called Noah to be a preacher of righteousness to
the people of his generation; and when they would not hearken to the
testimony of His authorized servant, the Lord destroyed them from the
earth. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were called in like manner for the work
which the Lord had appointed them.

The World:--How were they called?

Paul:--They were called by direct revelation from heaven, the Lord
speaking to them by His own voice. To Abraham He said: "Get thee out
of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house,
unto a land that I will show thee: and I will make of thee a great
nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great and thou shalt
be a blessing; * * * and in thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed." (Gen. 12: 1-3.) Isaac and Jacob were called in a similar
manner. (Gen. 28: 2-5; 28: 10-15.)

The World:--Would it be improper for a man to preach the Gospel and
administer its ordinances without his having been divinely commissioned
to do so?

Paul:--It would, indeed. No man has a right to take such honor unto
himself except he be called of God, as was Aaron. Permit me to read a
couple of extracts from my epistles to the Romans and to the Hebrews.
This is what I said:

{397} "How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how
shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach except
they be sent?" (Rom. 10: 14, 15.) "And no man taketh this honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5: 4.)

The World:--How was Aaron called to the ministry?

Paul:--He was called of the Lord through the Prophet Moses. As you well
know, the Lord spoke to Moses out of the burning bush, commissioning
him to go on a mission to Egypt and deliver the children of Israel.
Moses reminded the Lord that he had an impediment in his speech, when
the Lord said to him: "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that
he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee; and
when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart. And thou shalt speak
unto him and put words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and
with his mouth, and will teach you what you shall do." (Exodus 4: 14,
15.) "And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.
And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him. And Moses
told Aaron all the words of the Lord who had sent him, and all the
signs which he had commanded him." (Exodus 4: 27, 28.)

The World:--When men are called of the Lord, through His inspired
servants, to minister unto the people, is it necessary for them to be
ordained and set apart for their respective duties by the laying on of
the hands of the Lord's servants?

Paul:--It is. Such has been the practice in every Gospel dispensation.
Joshua, the son of Nun, was set apart, as directed of the Lord, through
the imposition of hands by Moses. Let me read to you what Moses has
written on this matter: "And the Lord said unto Moses, take thee
Joshua, the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and lay thine
hands upon him; and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before
all the congregation; and give him a charge in their sight. And thou
shalt put some of thine honor upon him, that all the congregation of
the children of Israel may be obedient. * * * And Moses did as the
Lord commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar
the priest, and before all the congregation: and he laid his hands
upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord commanded by the hand of
Moses." (Num. 27: 18-20, 22, 23.)

The World:--Paul, in what way were you called to the ministry, and by
whom were you ordained?

Paul:--I was called by the Holy Ghost, and was ordained {398} under
the hands of Simeon, Lucius and Manaen. You will find a record of my
call and ordination in the 13th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
as follows: "Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain
prophets and teachers: as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger,
and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod
the tetrarch, and Saul. As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the
Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their
hands on them, they sent them away." (Acts 13: 1-3.)

The World:--We have no further questions to ask you, Paul.

Latter-day Saints:--We now respectfully ask you to hear what the
Apostle Peter has to say on this very important subject.

PETER'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--Were you called of the Lord and ordained to take part in
His ministry?

Peter:--I was. You will find an account of my call and ordination, as
well as that of the other eleven apostles, in the third chapter of
Mark's Gospel. It is as follows: "And he goeth up into a mountain, and
calleth unto him whom He would: and they came unto him. And he ordained
twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth
to preach." (Mark 3: 13, 14.) "Ye have not chosen me," said Jesus, "but
I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth
fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever you shall ask
of the Father in my name, he may give it you." (John 15: 16.)

The World:--Must a man be called of God and ordained by Divine
authority before he can hold an office in the Church of Christ?

Peter:--He must. The death of Judas left a vacancy in the quorum of
Apostles. In choosing his successor we appealed to the Lord to manifest
to us His mind and will in the selection of a man to fill the vacancy.
There were two men. Barnabas and Matthias, whom we considered equally
worthy of the honor. We presented these two men before the Lord in
prayer and said, "Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, show
which of these two thou hast chosen, that he may take part of this
ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that
he might go to his own place." (Acts 1: 24, 25.) It was revealed to
us that Matthias was {399} the Lord's choice, and he was appointed by
unanimous vote.

The World:--Are we to understand from what you have said that it was
the desire of the Lord that Apostles and Prophets and all the other
officers should continue in the Church?

Peter:--Such, indeed, was the desire of the Lord. If it had not been,
He would not have appointed a successor to Judas.

The World:--Our ministers have told us that Apostles and Prophets are
not necessary in these days; that they were placed in the Church to
establish Christianity, and that when Christianity was established they
were no longer needed.

Peter:--There is nothing in the Scriptures to warrant such an
assertion. On the contrary, it is most positively stated that the Lord
put these officers in the Church "for the perfecting of the saints, for
the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." And
they were to remain in the church "till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; that we henceforth
be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive." (Eph. 4: 12-14.)

The World:--How was the primitive Christian Church organized?

Peter:--It was "built upon the foundation of apostles and prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone." (Eph. 2: 20.) The
Lord placed in the Church Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers, etc. (Eph. 4: 11.)

The World:--The churches of the world are not organized after that
pattern?

Peter:--They are not. They were not established by Christ. Had Christ
established them, He would have put in them the same officers that
He put in the early Christian Church. The Churches of the world were
established by men. They are named after men. There is Saint Paul's
Church, Saint Peter's Church, Saint Mark's Church, Saint Luke's Church,
Saint John's Church, etc.

The World:--There seems, therefore, to have been an apostasy from the
primitive Christian Church?

Peter:--There has. The Scriptures are replete with prophecies
concerning the great apostasy which was to take place after the death
of the apostles. Permit me to call your attention to a few of them.
Have you a Bible at hand?

{400} The World:--We have.

Peter:--Turn to the fourth chapter of Paul's second epistle to Timothy
and read what he prophesied concerning the apostasy that was to take
place.

The World:--Paul prophesied as follows: "For the time will come when
they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall
they heap unto themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall
turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables."
(II Tim. 4: 3,4.)

Peter:--Now turn to the 29th chapter of Isaiah and read what the
prophet said concerning the state of the world in the last days.

The World:--Isaiah prophesied as follows: "Stay yourselves, and wonder;
cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger,
but not with strong drink. For the Lord hath poured out upon you the
spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your
rulers, the seers hath he covered. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch
as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do
honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear
toward me is taught by the precept of men; therefore, behold, I will
proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work
and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." (Isaiah 29: 9, 10,
13, 14.)

Peter:--How perfectly did Paul describe the condition of the world at
the present time! Instead of having inspired Apostles and Prophets to
reveal to them the mind and will of the Lord, and to teach to them the
true plan of salvation, the people have heaped to themselves teachers,
having itching ears, and they have turned their ears away from the
truth and turned them unto fables. When you think of the multitude of
jarring and contending sects that are in the world today, you can see
how literally the prophecies of Paul and Isaiah have been fulfilled.

The World:--Were Paul and Isaiah the only ones who prophesied
concerning an apostasy?

Peter:--They were not. There were many others who uttered similar
predictions. But I ask you to read what Isaiah further said concerning
the apostasy; you will find it in the twenty-fourth chapter of his book.

The World:--Isaiah says: "The earth also is defiled under the
inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed {401} the laws,
changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath
the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate;
therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left."
(Isaiah 24: 5, 6).

Peter:--Notice the similarity in these prophecies: Isaiah prophesied
that the day would come when the people would transgress the laws,
change the ordinance, and break the everlasting covenant. Paul declared
that the time would come when they would not endure sound doctrine,
but would heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, who would
turn their ears away from the truth and turn them unto fables. On
another occasion Paul prophesied as follows: "For I know this, that
after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after them." (Acts 20: 29, 30.)
Paul lived to see the beginning of the terrible apostasy of which he
spoke. "I marvel," said he, writing to the Galatians, "that ye are so
soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto
another gospel: which is not another; but there be some that trouble
you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ." (Gal. 1: 6, 7.) I myself
prophesied concerning the apostasy. Here is what I said: "But there
were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false
teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of
whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And through covetousness
shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you." (II Peter 2:
1-3.)

The World:--The prophets and apostles truly foretold an apostasy, and
the divided state of Christendom--the hundreds of different sects and
denominations, the numerous, conflicting theories which are being
advocated by men for the Gospel of Jesus Christ--bear incontrovertible
testimony that such an apostasy has taken place. Must this condition
continue, or will there be a restitution?

Peter:--There will be a restitution of all things spoken of by the
mouth of the holy prophets.

The World:--Do you think the Lord will ever send us Apostles and
Prophets to teach us the true Gospel of Christ as it was taught by Him
and His inspired servants in ancient days?

Peter:--He will, for so He has declared. Here is the {402} Apostle
John; I pray you, hear what he has to say concerning the restoration of
the Gospel in the latter days.

JOHN'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--John, do you think we will ever be favored with new
revelation from God?

John:--Have you forgotten what Joel prophesied concerning the last
days? He said: "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour
out my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see
visions." (Joel 2: 28.)

The World:--Then, we may look for Prophets to be sent of God.

John:--Yes, and angels also will come down from heaven to restore that
which was lost. You have heard already of the great apostasy that was
to take place; you have seen how the principles and ordinances of the
Gospel have been perverted; you see the Christian world a Babel of
Confusion. The Lord knew that all these things would take place, and He
decreed that in the last days He would set His hand again to recover
His people from their lost and fallen state. He revealed to me that
before His judgments were poured out upon the inhabitants of the earth
He would send an angel with the everlasting Gospel, to be preached to
every nation under heaven. Read, I pray you, what I said concerning
this matter in the fourteenth chapter of my book.

The World:--You wrote as follows: "And I saw another angel fly in the
midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that
dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and
people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for
the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven and
earth, and the sea, and the fountains of water. (Rev. 14: 6, 7.)

John:--Now, I advise you to look for the fulfillment of the things
which the Lord has spoken by the mouth of His holy prophets.

The World:--Thank you, John; you are excused.

Latter-day Saints:--Now, we testify to you in words of soberness that
the angel which John predicted would come to the earth in the last days
with the everlasting Gospel, has come to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The
Lord also sent heavenly messengers to him and others, who conferred
upon them Divine {403} authority, and instructed them concerning the
restoration of the true Church of Christ on the earth for the last
time, preparatory to the coming of the Son of Man. That Church has been
organized after the primitive pattern. In it are inspired Apostles
and Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. It teaches the very
same Gospel that was taught by Christ and His Apostles; its members
enjoy the same gifts and blessings that were enjoyed by the former-day
saints: they have the gift of prophecy, revelations, visions, healings,
tongues, interpretation of tongues, etc. And, if you desire to know the
truth of these things, we advise you to follow the exhortation of the
Apostle James, when he said, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of
God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall
be given him." (James 1: 5.)

    "_Our enemies have kicked us, and cuffed us, and driven us from
    pillar to post, and we have multiplied and increased the more,
    until we have become what we are this day_."

    --_Brigham Young_.

    "_It is not our business to fight our enemies. There is no man or
    woman on the face of the earth, but is our brother or our sister.
    They are the children of God and we are here to bear and forbear
    with them in their interest and for the glory of God_."

    --_Lorenzo Snow_.

{404}



A CONGRESSMAN'S OPINION OF THE PROPHET.

(_From the Historical Record_.)

In the winter of 1840, the Prophet Joseph Smith went to Washington,
D. C, to petition the president of the United States and Congress to
redress the grievances of the Saints against the people of Missouri.
While at the nation's capital he had several opportunities of speaking
in public. On the evening of February 5, 1840, he addressed a large
audience. Mr. M. L. Davis, a member of Congress, was present. In a
letter written to his wife the day after, he gives the following
opinion of the Prophet:

    I went last evening to hear "Joe Smith," the celebrated Mormon,
    expound his doctrine. I, with several others, had a desire to
    understand his tenets as explained by himself.

    He is not an educated man; but he is a plain, sensible,
    strong-minded man. Everything he says is said in a manner to
    leave an impression that he is sincere. There is no levity, no
    fanaticism, no want of dignity in his deportment. He is apparently
    from forty to forty-five years of age, rather above the middle
    stature, and what you ladies would call a very good looking man.
    In his garb there are no peculiarities; his dress being that of a
    plain, unpretending citizen. He is by profession a farmer, but is
    evidently well read. * * *

    During the whole of his address, which occupied more than two
    hours, there was no opinion or belief that he expressed, that
    was calculated, in the slightest degree, to impair the morals
    of society, or in any manner to degrade and brutalize the human
    species. There was much in his precepts, if they were followed,
    that would soften the asperities of man toward man, and that
    would tend to make him a more rational being than he is generally
    found to be. There was no violence, no fury, no denunciation.
    His religion appears to be a religion of meekness, lowliness and
    mild persuasion. * * * Throughout his whole address he displayed
    strongly a spirit of charity and forbearance. The Mormon Bible,
    he said, was communicated to him direct from heaven. If there was
    such a thing on earth as the author of it, then he (Smith) was the
    author; but the idea that he wished to impress was that he had
    penned it as dictated by God. * * *

    I have changed my opinion of the Mormons. They are an injured and
    much abused people.

{405}



AN ANNOUNCEMENT CONCERNING THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY
SAINTS.

BY HEBER J. GRANT, TOKYO, JAPAN.

    Prove all things; hold fast to that which is good.

    1 Thess. 5: 21.

    If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

    But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is
    like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed.

    James 1: 5, 6.

We, as duly authorized representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, have been sent to Japan for the purpose of teaching
the plan of life and salvation, as it has again been revealed from
heaven by the true and living God to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

We earnestly entreat the people of this nation to fully investigate the
message which we have come to deliver.

We testify that there is a God in heaven who is in very deed the Father
of the spirits of all men. He is the Creator of heaven and earth, and
all that in them is. He existed before the world was created; exists
today and will exist forever. He is the same yesterday, today and
forever. He is all powerful and to His wisdom there is no limit. He is
no respecter of persons; is full of mercy, love and compassion, and is
forgiving to all those who will repent of sin and seek Him and serve
Him with full purpose of heart.

All men are well aware that compliance with the laws of a nation is
absolutely necessary in order to become a citizen thereof, and the
same applies with equal force to those who wish to become citizens of
the kingdom of God. A knowledge of and compliance with God's laws is
a matter of the most {406} vital consequence to all men. These laws
are contained in the divinely inspired books known as the Bible and
Book of Mormon. We feel assured that all who will earnestly and fully
investigate will come to a knowledge of the divine authenticity of
these records.

For many hundreds of years after the creation of the earth God appeared
in person, from time to time, and talked with His children and gave
instructions as to what was necessary for them to do in order to be
worthy, when this life was ended, to come back and dwell forever in
His presence. A little over nineteen hundred years ago He sent His
Son Jesus Christ to the earth to teach mankind the plan of life and
salvation. Jesus is the Savior of the world, and faith on His name and
obedience to His commandments will take us back into the presence of
God where we shall dwell forever.

Jesus Christ called upon all men to repent, to live lives of
righteousness and to be baptized in water for the remission of their
sins, and made them the promise that if they would do this and keep His
commandments they should know whether the doctrines He proclaimed were
of God or man.

In the spring of 1820, God and His Son Jesus Christ visited the earth
and talked with Joseph Smith. They afterwards sent heavenly messengers
who gave him the necessary instructions and authority to establish on
the earth the true Church of Christ. Some immediately accepted the
doctrines which this prophet taught, but the majority misrepresented
his teachings and persecuted him. False charges were preferred against
him, and he was imprisoned many times, but upon trial was declared
innocent of every charge. He lived a life of virtue and uprightness,
maintaining, in the face of the most bitter opposition, his testimony
as to the truths revealed to him from heaven. Finally, while he was
in Carthage jail, Illinois, U. S., under the pledged protection of
the state, awaiting a trial, to which he had voluntarily surrendered
himself, the jail was attacked and he was murdered by a mob of wicked
men. Thus did Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the nineteenth century, seal
his testimony with his life's blood.

Dr. David Nelson in his book, "The Cause and Cure of Infidelity," says:
"A true prophet is not applauded by a majority of the wicked or by
the mass of the depraved. He is generally disliked by those furthest
from God, and spoken evil of by those who sink deepest in sin. He is
often not only reviled, but put to death if the laws permit; but the
false prophet is neither stoned nor sawn asunder. He is often extolled
greatly by the most dissolute, and is at least tolerated or praised
{407} to some extent by the leaders in depravity or the officers of
sin."

Many people have spoken ill of the Latter-day Saints, or as we are
commonly called "Mormons." We ask to be judged not by the false
statements of our enemies, but by the infallible standard, "By their
fruits ye shall know them." Wisdom dictates that no cause should be
judged without a hearing, and least of all when only one side has been
heard, and that the side of its enemies. The history of the Latter-day
Saints is before the world and speaks for itself.

In a tract entitled "My reasons for leaving the Church of England and
joining the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," the writer
says: "No one who will read the whole history of the Latter-day Saints
with a truly honest and unprejudiced heart, and look upon the blessings
of prosperity which they at present enjoy, can for a moment doubt that
they are members of a church which is under the direct guidance of God
through new revelation.

"I am quite sure that any one who will read with a fair, and
unprejudiced mind the teachings of Joseph Smith, can not but conclude
that he must have been inspired, especially when they consider the fact
that all the great and marvelous work which he performed before his
martyrdom was accomplished while he was still a young man, and that he
had never enjoyed the privileges of education and experience."

We call attention to the last of the accompanying Articles of our
Faith, that "if there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report,
or praiseworthy, we seek after these things," and advise all men to do
likewise.

In conclusion, in all solemnity and humility, we bear testimony
that God lives, that Jesus Christ is His Son and the Savior of the
world; that Joseph Smith was the prophet of the true and living God,
commissioned to restore again the Gospel of Jesus Christ to the
inhabitants of the earth. We once more entreat all men to investigate
our message, and promise, as did our Savior, that all who will repent
of sin and obey the Gospel shall receive a knowledge from God of the
divinity of the doctrines which we proclaim.

{408}



CORNER STONES OF REORGANIZATION.

A FEW FACTS CONCERNING ITS FOUNDERS COMPILED FROM EARLY CHURCH HISTORY.

    _When men come as servants of God, claiming a divine commission to
    reorganize the Church of Christ, the searchlight of investigation
    should be turned upon them. If they bear it there is evidence that
    they have been sent of God. But if inconsistencies hedge their
    entire course of life it is well for an inquirer after truth to
    examine their AUTHORITY_.

    _William Marks, Zenos H. Gurley, William W. Blair and Samuel Powers
    ordained the Son of the Prophet to succeed his father as President
    of the Church. William W. Blair and Samuel Powers were never
    members of the original Church. We, therefore, pass them by, and
    proceed to bring out a few facts from early Church history relative
    to Marks, Gurley and Briggs, the two latter being the founders of
    the "Reorganization_."

HISTORY OF WILLIAM MARKS.

_WILLIAM MARKS was President of the Nauvoo Stake at the time of the
martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph, June 27, 1844_.

SOMETHING FROM THE PROPHET'S JOURNAL.

"Whatever can be the matter with these men (Law and Marks)? Is it that
the wicked flee when no man pursueth? that hit pigeons always flutter?
that drowning men catch at straws? or that Presidents Law and Marks
are absolutely traitors to the Church, that mv remarks should produce
such excitement in their minds? The people in the town are astonished,
almost every man saying to his neighbor: Is it possible that Brother
Law or Brother Marks is a traitor and would deliver Brother Joseph into
the hands of his enemies in Missouri? {409} If not, what can be the
meaning of all this? The righteous are as bold as a lion."

MARKS DROPPED FROM HIS POSITION AS PRESIDENT OF NAUVOO STAKE.
_WILLIAM MARKS was dropped from his position as President of the Nauvoo
Stake at a conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints, held October 7, 1844. (T. & S., Vol. 5, 692.) The whole Church
voted NOT to sustain him, excepting two votes. This action was taken
because he supported the claims of Sidney Rigdon as guardian of the
Church_.

_On December 9th, 1844--Nauvoo, Illinois, he acknowledged his error in
the following_:

NOTICE.

"After mature and candid deliberation, I am fully and satisfactorily
convinced that Mr. Sidney Rigdon's claims to the Presidency of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints are not founded in truth.
I have been deceived by his specious pretenses and now feel to warn
every one over whom I may have any influence to beware of him, and his
pretended visions and revelations. THE TWELVE ARE THE PROPER PERSONS TO
LEAD THE CHURCH." (T. & S., Vol. 5, 742.)

"Signed William Marks."

_After making this acknowledgment he was received back into fellowship,
but did not again obtain his former position. He became dissatisfied,
withdrew from the Church and was excommunicated_.

JOINS THE STRANGITE ORGANIZATION AND PLAYS A LEADING PART.

_Copied from the "Voree Record," official record of Strangle Church_.

_Conference April 6, 1846_.

"On motion of WILLIAM MARKS, High Priest and President of the Stake at
Nauvoo, James J. Strang unanimously called to the Chair as President of
the Conference."

"On motion of Elder WILLIAM MARKS it was unanimously resolved that this
Church receive, acknowledge, and uphold JAMES J. STRANG as President of
this Church, {410} Prophet, Seer, Revelator, and Translator with our
faith and prayers."

"On motion of Elder WILLIAM MARKS it was unanimously resolved that we
sustain and uphold Aaron Smith as Counselor to First President by our
faith and prayers."

"On motion of Elder WILLIAM MARKS, amended on motion of Elder John
E. Page, it was resolved that the case of Elder Rigdon be laid over
until the October conference for final action and in the meantime a
delegation be sent to visit Elder Rigdon personally on the matter by
appointment and under instructions of the First Presidency."

"President James J. Strang proposed the appointment of WILLIAM MARKS,
President pro tempore of the High Priest's quorum, which, being put
separately to the High Priests and the Conference at large, and
unanimously approved, he was thereupon appointed."

MARKS APPOINTED BISHOP OF STRANGITE CHURCH.

"_Voree Record"--Conference April 8th, 1846_.

"The First Presidency presented WILLIAM MARKS for the office of
BISHOP of the Church, and on motion of Apostle John E. Page, resolved
unanimously (that he) be sustained."

MARKS APPOINTED AN APOSTLE, COUNSELOR AND PROPHET.

"_Voree Record"--Conference August 26th, 1849_.

"Brother WILLIAM MARKS was then ordained, consecrated and set apart as
APOSTLE of the Lord, Jesus Christ, a Counselor to the Prophet, one of
the First Presidency, and a PROPHET of the Most High God, under the
hands of President STRANG and Adams."

WILLIAM MARKS ORDAINED TO ADMINISTER BAPTISMS FOR DEAD.

"Voree Record"--Conference of August 26th, 1849.

"Brother WILLIAM MARKS was anointed, ORDAINED and set apart to
administer baptisms for the Dead, under the hands of Presidents STRANG
and Adams. * * * The choir sang a hymn, after which eucharist was
administered. The Conference then adjourned twenty minutes, to meet
at the water's edge for the purpose of attending to baptisms, both
for the living and the DEAD. Conference {411} assembled pursuant to
adjournment. Eight were initiated into the Church by being baptized for
a remission of their sins. After which large numbers were baptized for
their deceased relatives. Adjourned."

REVELATION OF JAMES J. STRANG GIVEN JANUARY 7TH, 1849. "Hearken,
O ye Saints, give ear, for the time to favor Zion is at hand, and the
time of her redemption draweth near. Draw near unto me and learn, for
the ways of men are foolishness before me. Behold ye shall be one,
and if ye are not one, ye are none of mine. And ye shall all speak
the same thing. Ye are cursed; ye are confounded because ye have many
tongues like unto mystery Babylon; and many are running to and fro,
speaking in their own wisdom, which is folly before me. * * * Behold my
servant, WILLIAM MARKS, has gone far ASTRAY in departing from me, yet
I will give unto him a little space, that he may return and receive my
word, and stand in his place; for I remembered his works that he has
done in the time that is past. If he will return and abide faithful, I
will make him great, and his possessions shall be great, and he shall
possess a city, and his children shall dwell therein; a nation shall
call him blessed. * * *"

HE REPENTS.

"_Voree Record"--Conference of August 25th, 1849_.

"President MARKS arose and said he felt that he ought to make a
confession to the Saints for NOT acting in his calling and also to ask
their forgiveness. Gave a brief history of the course he had pursued
after the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph, testified that he had ever
had the fullest confidence in the work of the last days, and knew it
was of God, and was now determined by the help of God to go forth in
the discharge of HIS DUTY and act in the place in which he was called
by revelation of God through his servant JAMES.

"President Geo. J. Adams remarked: He rejoiced with joy unspeakable to
see an old Saint coming back willing to do his duty, spoke very highly
of the former faithfulness of Brother Marks in the cause of God, how
he had kept himself uncontaminated in the midst of the lustful and
ungodly, and concluded by offering the following resolution, which was
sustained unanimously: Resolved, that we will forgive Brother Marks and
sustain him in his calling by our faith, confidence, and prayers."

{412}

LEAVES STRANG AND JOINS THOMPSON'S ORGANIZATION--HIS OWN STATEMENT.

"Epistle of WILLIAM MARKS, chief evangelical teacher of the school
of faith to all the traveling teachers' quorums and classes of said
school, and Jehovah's presbytery of Zion, Greeting:

"Beloved Brethren:--Having been chosen and ordained chief evangelical
teacher of the school of faith in Jehovah's presbytery of Zion, it
becomes my duty to say something by way of encouragement and also
by way of instruction to those who are placed under my care and
supervision; and first by way of encouragement, let me state what I
know in reference to the work in which we are engaged. In order to
do this, I must of necessity refer to my experience in the Church. I
was a member of the Church some ten years before the death of Joseph
and Hyrum Smith. I was appointed President of the Stake in Kirtland,
Ohio, in 1837, and continued in that office at Kirtland until the fall
of 1838, when I was called by revelation to Farr West, Missouri, but
before I arrived there the Saints were ordered to leave the state,
and when the Stake was organized at Nauvoo, in the fall of 1839, I
was appointed President thereof, and continued in that office up to
the death of Joseph the Prophet. I always believed the work was of
divine origin, and that Joseph Smith was called of God to establish
the Church among the Gentiles. During my administration in the Church
I saw and heard many things that was practiced and taught that I DID
NOT BELIEVED BE OF GOD, but I continued to do and teach such principles
as were plainly revealed as the law of the Church, for I thought that
pure and holy principles only would have a tendency to benefit mankind,
therefore, when the doctrine of polygamy was introduced into the Church
as a principle of exaltation I took a decided stand against it, which
stand rendered me quite unpopular with many of the leading ones of the
Church." (Harbinger and Organ, Vol. 3, Pages 52-3-4, Year 1853.)

AGAIN IN 1853 MARKS WRITES TO THOMPSON.

"Shabbona Grove, DeKalk County, Feb. 17th, 1853.

"Brother C. B. Thompson,

"Dear Sir:--I have some good news to communicate * * * I organized a
quorum at Batavia. James Blakeslie {413} was chosen chief, and Jehial
Savage, teacher. I ordained them to their offices, and they said they
had satisfactory evidence that the work is of God. I feel as though I
was well paid. Bless and praise the Lord.

"Yours in the bond of the covenant,

"Signed William Marks."

WILLIAM MARKS SENT BY THOMPSON TO LOCATE A GATHERING PLACE.

_The following appears in the "Harbinger and Organ" of Dec. 10th, 1853_:

"St. Joseph, Mo., Aug. 24, 1852.

"Brother Thompson:--I embrace this opportunity to drop a few lines to
you to let you know of our whereabouts. I arrived here with Brother
Childs and on the 22nd of this month, found Brother Stephens and the
most of his family sick; and he is not able to go with us. From what
we can learn of the surrounding country here we think is will be very
difficult to obtain a suitable LOCATION FOR THE SAINTS TO GATHER TO,
near this place on account of the high price of land. We have agreed to
start from here tomorrow morning to go north, probably to the Bluffs. *
* * We shall write you again as soon as we find a location. * * *

"Signed William Marks."

MARKS CHANGES AGAIN AND JOINS JOHN E. PAGE'S ORGANIZATION.

_The year 1855 finds him in a religions organization with John E. Page
and others. (History of the Reorganized Church, Vol. 3, 724_.)

ON JUNE 11TH, 1859, HE FINDS A PLACE IN THE "NEW ORGANIZATION."

On the above date he was received into this "Organization" subsequently
called the "Reorganized Church" on his ORIGINAL baptism into the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. His ORIGINAL ordination was also
accepted.

In the light of common sense and the following statement found in the
"Saints Herald" (the official organ of the "Reorganization"), what of
WILLIAM MARKS' authority? "WHENEVER INDIVIDUALS CLAIMING AUTHORITY
{414} UNDER THE CHURCH AS ORGANIZED BY THE FIRST JOSEPH BECAME MEMBERS
OF ANY FACTION THEY IMMEDIATELY BECAME DIVESTED OF ALL AUTHORITY."
("_Saints Herald," Vol. 4, No. 10, Page 158_.)

_Why did the "Reorganization" receive the Apostate Marks on his
ORIGINAL baptism and ORIGINAL ordination after he had joined "The
Strang faction," "The Thompson faction" "The Page faction" and "became
divested of all authority" (as stated above)? And what of the authority
of young Joseph who Was ordained under the hands of such men, WILLIAM
MARKS BEING MOUTH_?

FOLLOWING IS THE STATEMENT OF THE PROPHET CONCERNING APOSTATES:

"An Apostate, or one who has been cut off the Church and wish to come
in again, the law of the Church expressly says: That such shall repent
and be baptized and be admitted as at first." (T. & S., Vol. 5, 752.)

RECORD OF ZENOS H. GURLEY.

_ZENOS H. GURLEY was ordained a seventy in Nauvoo in 1844 under the
direction of President Joseph Young. (Record in Historian's office,
Salt Lake City.)_

_On April 6th, 1845, he was made the Senior President of the
twenty-first quorum of Seventy. (Minutes of 21st quorum_.)

THE PRESIDENT OF THE "REORGANIZATION" REPUDIATES AUTHORITY OF THE
MAN WHO ASSISTED IN HIS ORDINATION.

_On the 31st of January, 1905, President of the "Reorganization" wrote
the following to Elder Joseph F. Smith, Jr., relative to the limitation
of the number of Seventy's quorums_:

"There are no provisions as revelations as law to the Church for the
organization of more than seven quorums of Seventy; for that reason we
do not recognize as valid any of the ordinations in Nauvoo in 1844-5
beyond those of the first seven quorums; and our teaching is that the
number is necessarily limited by direct provision of the law."

{415}

GURLEY ENDORSES THE COURSE OF THE CHURCH IN 1846.

(_One month before the great Exodus then in preparation.) The Minutes
of January 3rd, 1846 (21st quorum) say_:

"Zenos H. Gurley enlarged on the subject of liberally donating to
the Church necessity. 'God,' said he, 'had so shaped the scheme of
salvation as that to be saved and appear approved of God, we must
SACRIFICE OF ALL WE POSSESS.' * * * He felt filled with the spirit. THE
COURSE THE CHURCH IS PURSUING HAS BEEN SPOKEN OF BY JESUS CHRIST AND
THE HOLY PROPHETS OF OLDEN TIMES."

GURLEY RECEIVES HIS ENDOWMENT IN THE NAUVOO TEMPLE.

"ZENOS H. GURLEY arose and said that the Presidents of the quorum had
RECEIVED THEIR ENDOWMENT. He observed that it was remarkable for an
unusual outpouring of the Holy Spirit. He felt for the quorum that they
should receive their endowment. The Church authorities, the quorum
of seventy in succession, should furnish the people engaged in the
endowment, one day each, and he wanted the quorum (21st) to acquit
themselves from every obligation." (Minutes of quorum, Jan. 10, 1846.)

GURLEY ON TEMPLE WORK.

"President ZENOS H. GURLEY arose and said: * * * 'The business before
the meeting was the arranging for the donation for the benefit of those
of the Priesthood engaged in the Temple' (NOT ON THE TEMPLE, BUT IN
THE TEMPLE). He beautifully observed that it was his design and also
this Council's, to exalt the Twenty-first quorum and the quorum should
reciprocally return the favors of the support and influence towards its
welfare." (Minutes of the quorum, January 17th, 1846.)

"President ZENOS H. GURLEY arose and said that the business before the
meeting (of the Twenty-first quorum) was to select persons to receive
their ENDOWMENTS. He had received direction to select ten or twelve to
GO IN THE TEMPLE. He desired the brethren not to think it partiality
to make this selection. * * * The Saints who have passed through the
trials of the Church were generally rooted and {416} grounded in love
and have a witness in their hearts or they would not have remained."
(Minutes of the Twenty-first quorum, January 25th, 1846.) _It was ten
days after he made this utterance that the Exodus of the main body of
the Church began, and this is the last reference we have of ZENOS H.
GURLEY while connected with the Church. What became of GURLEY? "Because
he had not root he withered away_."

JOINS THE STRANGITES--BECOMES AN ARDENT WORKER IMMEDIATELY.

_ZENOS H. GURLEY writes to a Brother Cooper, Editor of the "Strangite
Gospel Herald," under date of January 10th, 1850, from Pittsburg C. W
., relating an account of his labors in the STRANGITE CHURCH. He closes
with these words_:

"The brethren in this place, though young, are old enough to dream of
BEAVER (meaning Beaver Island, Strang's headquarters). Are you going to
BEAVER in the spring? is the inquiry of many of them. * * * But, thank
God, if we do no more we are rightly paid for our trouble. One of the
Prophets, speaking in reference to these times, says, 'a man shall be
more precious than fine gold. Farewell.'" ("Gospel Herald," Page 274.)

_ZENOS H. GURLEY writes to the "Gospel Herald" (Strangite organ) from
St. Lawrence under date of March 15th, 1850_:

"I am now in New York State in company with Brother Linnel, assisting
Brother Silsby in organizing the brethren and helping them get ready
for BEAVER. We expect seventy or one hundred. Will leave here in May
for that place. I left Brother Wright on Monday last. * * *" ("Gospel
Herald," Page 22.)

GURLEY RECEIVES AN APPOINTMENT AT STRANGITE CONFERENCE.

_September 16th, 1851. Beaver Island_.

"Moved and seconded that ZENOS H. GURLEY be appointed to preside
over the branches in Western and Southern Wisconsin, west of Voree,
by judicial appointment. Carried. * * *" (Record of Conference, pen
written.)

{417}

GURLEY EXCOMMUNICATED FOR HERESY FROM STRANGITES.

"James Blakeslie dropped for HERESY and Jahie Savage for the same, and
their Priesthood taken from them. ZENOS H. GURLEY, ALSO PRIESTHOOD
TAKEN FROM HIM. * * *" (Voree Record--Conference at Enoch's Grove,
Beaver Island, July 9, 1852.)

DOUBTS FOLLOWED AFTER EXCOMMUNICATION.

_By 1851, after about five years of active service, he became convinced
that James J. Strang was not a Servant of God. Manifestations followed
which satisfied him that he should help organize another Church.
Accordingly, he and Jason W. Briggs united their efforts and organized
what is known as the "NEW ORGANIZATION," which subsequently emerged
into the "Re-Organized Church," in 1860--16 years after the Martyrdom.
Zenos H. Gurley, after following the Twelve Apostles as the presiding
Quorum of the Church, and holding the position as Senior President of
the Twenty-first Quorum of Seventy up to the time of the exodus of
the Church from Nauvoo, in 1846, left the Church and joined James J.
Strang, remaining with this organization until he and Briggs CREATED
THE "NEW ORGANIZATION." In 1860 he assisted William Marks in ordaining
the President of the "Reorganization." The question naturally arises,
DID HE HAVE ANY AUTHORITY? We prefer to answer this question by simply
quoting the statement found in the "Saints Herald," Vol. 4, Page 158_.

"Whenever individuals claiming authority under THE CHURCH AS ORGANIZED
BY THE FIRST JOSEPH became members of ANY FACTION, THEY IMMEDIATELY
BECAME DIVESTED OF ALL AUTHORITY." ("Saints Herald," Vol 4, No. 10,
Page 158.)

GURLEY'S DOUBTS FOLLOW HIS FAMILY.

_Zenos H. Gurley ("an apostle") had been able to convert many to this
organization, yet he was not satisfied in his own mind. In connection
with Jason W. Briggs (founder of the "Reorganization), he forsook the
Church they claimed had been built upon "revelations" from divers
persons, ("Saints Herald" Vol. 33, Pages 248-249.) The reasons why
these men withdrew from the "Reorganization" were as follows: That they
could not believe in_:

{418} 1st--"The literal gathering of the Church into Jackson and the
adjoining counties in the State of Missouri (or any one or more places)
known as a local Zion."

2d--"Temple building and ceremonial endowments therein."

3d--"Baptism for the dead."

4th--"Tithing as a law applicable to the Church."

5th--"The law of consecration by which individuals are made legal heirs
to the Kingdom of Zion."

6th--"A sole mouthpiece of God to the Church."

7th--"The plenary inspiration of and consequent absolute authority of
what are called the sacred books."

8th--"The doctrine of 'cursing our enemies,' and of 'avenging God upon
them to the third and fourth generations.'"

9th--"To the foregoing may be added the revelation of January 19, 1841,
Section 107 D. & C. (124, our edition), which enjoins upon the Church
the building of a hotel, called the 'Lord's boarding-house,' for Joseph
Smith and posterity to dwell in from generation to generation, as
also the promise contained therein, viz.: 'And as I said unto Abraham
concerning the kindreds of the earth, even so I say to my servant
Joseph, in thee and in thy seed shall the kindreds of the earth be
blessed.'"

"This, coupled with the provisions in Section 43, that 'none else
should or could receive revelation for the Church, and the provision of
Section 19, that the Church shall receive Joseph's words and commands
the same as if from God's own mouth,--establish in our judgment a
lineal descent of authority equivalent to an imperial dynasty, which is
foreign to the spirit and genius of the Gospel of Christ.'"

JASON W. BRIGGS, ANOTHER FOUNDER OF THE "NEW ORGANIZATION."

_Jason W. Briggs, who was really the founder of the "Reorganization"
or who, perhaps, did more than any other man to bring about that sect,
was born June 20th, 1821, at Pompey, Onondaga County, N. Y. It is
said he joined the church at Potosi, Wis., about 1842, but we have
no history of this man except as we get through the records of the
"Reorganization." He remained with the church under the leadership of
President Young and the Twelve until the year 1846. It is interesting
to note in this regard that the exodus commenced February 4th, 1846, so
we are quite safe in saying that this man was one of the "Fair weather
friends_."

{419}

JASON W. BRIGGS JOINS THE STRANGITES.

_After the exodus Jason W. Briggs joined James J. Strang and in Jus
organization labored in the ministry quite extensively (Reorganite
History 3: 737), filling short missions to various parts of New York
and in Wisconsin. In September of 1849, with B. G. Wright, he organized
the Waukesha branch of Mr. Strang's church (Hist, of Reorganized Church
3: 737-8._)

ORDAINED A HIGH PRIEST BY JAMES J. STRANG.

"Resolved unanimously that JASON W. BRIGGS be ordained a High
Priest. ORDINATION under the hands of President James J. Strang and
WILLIAM MARKS, President of the stake at Nauvoo." ("Voree Record of
Conferences," April 8th, 1846.)

FOLLOWING FROM THE "NORTHERN ISLANDER," JULY 31ST, 1851.

"The following letter was written in answer to one from Mr. Briggs of
Wisconsin. His letter is too scurrilous to appear in print, therefore
we publish only the reply of Mr. Bacon."

"Beaver Island, July 18th, 1851.

"Mr. Briggs:

"Sir: Some time since I received a letter from you in which you claim
to take the liberty to write to me, on the ground that our acquaintance
had been such as to forbid personal enmities; and, therefore, you would
carry out the precept: 'Do unto others as you would have others do unto
you;' and that I was less orthodox in the pretences of Strang, etc.,
than some others. * * * I will now notice the argument, powerful as
it may be, which you assert you have found upon examination, touching
the letter of appointment. But what examination can this be, in which
you have found out that you spoke that which was not true? WHEN YOU
DECLARED IN PUBLIC CONGREGATIONS, AT YOUR OWN FIRESIDE, AND AT THE
FIRESIDE OF YOUR NEIGHBORS, that Joseph Smith wrote with his own hand
the 'Letter of Appointment' (for you saw him in vision) AND YOUR
SURPRISE AND FAITH IN THE 'KNOCKING SPIRITS' OF NEW YORK, FROM THE FACT
THAT THEY (the spirits) ASSERTED THE SAME?"

{420}

BRIGGS STILL A STRANGITE IN 1848.

_Jason W. Briggs represents the Beloit and Prairie branches of the
Strangite Church at the Conference held in Voree, Wis., October 8th,
18-18. ("Voree Record of Conferences," pen written._)

BRIGGS JOINS WITH WILLIAM SMITH.

_In 1850 Briggs left Mr. Strang's organisation and joined with
William Smith, who had himself been a follower of Mr. Strang until
excommunicated from that organization for the crime of adultery. In
William Smith's Church Mr. Jason W. Briggs accepted the position
of "APOSTLE," but at the time of the disintegration of Wm. Smith's
Church in 1851, he withdrew, and in 1852 joined with Zenos H. Gurley.
These two men organized this "NEW ORGANIZATION" today known as the
"Reorganization_."

BRIGGS FORSAKES THE CHURCH HE ORGANIZED.

_Although Jason W. Briggs had received a Revelation as he alleges on
the 15th of November, 1851, on the prairie some three miles from town
of Beloit, Wis., declaring that Joseph Smith of the Reorganization
should preside over the High Priesthood of the Church, etc., on March
28th, 1886, he severed his connection with the church he claimed was
of divine origin and in conversation with Elder M. F. Cowley in the
presence of President F. M. Lyman and Elder John W. Taylor in relation
to his revelation he said: "I WOULDN'T LIKE TO CALL IT A REVELATION
NOW, BUT WE LEARN BY EXPERIENCE_."

_Reader, the above facts will be of service to you if you are
interested in the Great Latter-day work instituted through Joseph
Smith, the Prophet. However things may be elsewhere, on this earth
truth is met everywhere by error. The false has its adherents as well
as the true. Especially is this so in religion. Each individual must
sift the grain from the chaff. To those who become earnest in this
labor, God has promised help. But without effort, without faith, there
is no return and men are allowed to settle into that condition which
they are satisfied with. The positive search for the unadulterated plan
of salvation is not usually made and many are deceived. For this reason
most men do not know the pure truth about religion. In the question
before us we have the principle of_ {421} _AUTHORITY to consider, PUT
WHAT FOLLOWS TO THE ABOVE TEST_.

_In the economy of God's work is found a Holy Priesthood through which
He deals with mankind_.

_Without this Priesthood the Church of God cannot exist for there would
be no one authorized to do the work_.

_The Ancients, those who wrote the Bible, and others, held this
Priesthood. Christ conferred it upon the APOSTLES, Seventies, etc_.

_The world fell into spiritual darkness and hundreds of religions
sprang up after this Priesthood was taken away_.

_When the time came for the Restoration of the Gospel it was necessary
that this Priesthood be restored, Peter, James and John (the ancient
Apostles) being sent to confer the authority they held upon the Prophet
Joseph Smith_.

_Joseph Smith, the Prophet, conferred it upon others_.

_At the time of the death of the Prophet the church was thoroughly
organized with twelve apostles, etc., who held the same authority the
Twelve held in the days of Christ, and to whom the Lord said in the
year 1837_:

"For unto you (the TWELVE) and those (The First Presidency) who are
appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the Power
of this PRIESTHOOD given for the last days and for the time in the
which is the dispensation of the fullness of times." D. & C., Section
112: 30.

_And again_:

"The Twelve traveling Counselors are called to be The Twelve Apostles
or Special Witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world; thus
differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their
calling. And they form a quorum EQUAL IN AUTHORITY AND POWER to the
three Presidents previously mentioned." D. & C., Section 107: 23-4.

_Now, then, notwithstanding the church had such a commission and such
power, we are told by some that the church fell away immediately after
the death of the Prophet, and that the three men (Marks, Gurley and
Briggs) whose record we have given above, and who were never even
members of any general presiding quorum, were able to apostatize, join
one man made church after another, be ordained to positions in those
churches, and then possess AUTHORITY enough to ordain a man a Prophet,
Seer and Revelator and earthly head of the Church of God_.

{422}_In conclusion, we wish to say that there is but One at a time
who holds the keys and the right to receive revelation for the church,
and that man is the President of the Church. When the First Presidency
is disorganised through the death of the President, then, according
to revelation, the TWELVE APOSTLES become the presiding quorum of the
church, and then if the Lord has any revelations to give to His people
they will come through the proper channel--the President of the Twelve_.

_When we see this man, or that man, or perhaps that woman or child
giving revelations as was the case with the "Reorganisation," when
JASON W. BRIGGS, ZENOS H. GURLEY, HENRY H. DEAM, or the daughter of
Zenos H. Gurley, received "revelations" bearing on the organization of
their cult or the regulation of the Church, we will know assuredly that
these things are not of God_.

    "_The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it
    is founded upon wisdom; it is a heavenly banner; it is like a great
    tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded
    from the burning rays of an inclement sun; and Mormons as well as
    Presbyterians, and every other denomination, have equal rights to
    partake of the fruits of this great tree of our national liberty_."

    --_Joseph Smith, The Prophet_.

{423}



IS BELIEF ALONE SUFFICIENT?

ELDER J. H. PAUL.

There is a very large class of professed Christians who maintain that
if an individual does no more than simply believe in Christ, he will
be saved eternally in God's Kingdom of glory. We do not purpose to
disparage the value of belief or faith, for these principles occupy a
very important position in the plan of human redemption; but it is the
design to show that the doctrine which predicates salvation upon belief
only is erroneous, and consequently dangerous.

The evangelist writes: "And this is eternal life, that they might know
Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou has sent" (John
xvii: 3). Conjoin this statement with another passage of Scripture,
which reads thus: "And hereby do we know that we know Him, if we keep
His commandments. He that saith, I know Him, and keepeth not His
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in Him" (1 John ii: 3, 4).

The teachings of these Scriptures are--First: No one can be saved,
or obtain eternal life, without a knowledge of God, and of Christ.
Second: Those who fail to keep the commandments of the Savior do not
possess a knowledge of God; and hence the conclusion is inevitable
that there is no salvation without obedience to the Gospel laws and
ordinances. This conclusion is in direct harmony with the statements
of the Apostle Paul, who says: "And to you who are troubled rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with His mighty
angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of His power" (2 Thess. i: 7, 8, 9). Again: "Go
ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you" (Matt, xxviii: 19,
20). Thus the disciples were sent forth with a mission to convert all
nations if possible, and they were instructed to enjoin upon those
who became Christians obedience to "all things whatsoever" Christ
gave as commandments to the {424} early Apostles. His language is so
comprehensive that no command can be omitted.

"Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the
children of Abraham" (Gal. iii: 7). But, "If ye were Abraham's
children, ye would do the works of Abraham" (John viii: 39). Here it is
substantially stated that those who have Christian faith are adopted
into the family of Abraham, thus becoming his children; but this
privilege is accorded to those only who do the works of Abraham. How
this ancient Patriarch obtained the right to be called the "Father of
the Faithful" is thus set forth: "Because that Abraham obeyed my voice,
and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws" (Gen.
xxvi: 5). These were the works of Abraham, and those who are counted
worthy to belong to his family, or to the "household of faith," must
also obey God's voice, and keep His charge, commandments, statutes
and laws. According to Scripture, no evasion of this requirement is
possible; for those who are Abraham's children obey the commandments of
God.

St. James speaks to the point under consideration thus:

    "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your
    own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he
    is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: for he
    beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth
    what manner of man he was. But whoso looketh into the perfect
    law of liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful
    hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his
    deed." (James i: 22-25).

Now, what is the "word?" St. Peter answers this question decisively:
"Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by
the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever. . . . But the word
of the Lord endureth for ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel
is preached unto you" (1 Peter i: 23, 25).

Thus we learn that the Gospel is the word of God, and it "liveth and
abideth for ever." Whosoever, therefore, is not a doer of the Gospel
requirements is deceiving himself. Notice how particularly the Apostle
states that the blessings of the Gospel, or the perfect law of liberty,
are obtained by doing the work enjoined by it.

St. Paul writes: "But ye, brethren, be not weary of well doing. And if
any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no
company with him, that he may be ashamed" (2 Thess. iii: 13, 14). The
"word" referred to in St. Paul's epistle was, for instance, that the
Saints should not become "weary in well doing," and he directed that
those who {425} would not obey this commandment should be excluded
from the company of Christians. It is folly for us to suppose that
those who disqualify themselves for association with Saints on earth
by neglecting to keep the commandments of the Lord, are fitted for the
company of God, angels and saints in heaven.

"Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God; and every
one that loveth Him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of Him.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and
keep His commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep His
commandments, and His commandments are not grievous" (1 John v: 1-3).
This same writer further says: "We know that we have passed from death
unto life because we love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother
abideth in death" (1 John iii: 14). There is, according to this last
Scripture, not eternal life, but death abiding in the soul of every one
who does not love the brethren; and the first quotation assures us that
where there is such a love, there is also obedience to the commandments
of God. We cannot dissever these things, for the Almighty has joined
them together. It follows, from the Scriptures just considered, that
those who fail to obey God's Gospel commandments are abiding in death,
not in life.

In conformity with the direct declarations of the Scriptures which have
been produced, showing that the commandments of God must be obeyed,
we observe that the doctrine of obedience to the law is practically
enforced. The Lord expresses condemnation of those whose works are not
satisfactory. For instance:

    "And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write: These things
    saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars;
    I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art
    dead. Be watchful and strengthen the things which remain that
    are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before
    God . . . And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write:
    These things saith He that is holy, ... I know thy works; behold I
    have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it; for thou
    hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied
    my name." (Rev. iii: 1, 2, 7, 8).

The judgment of the Lord is herein clearly founded upon the "works" in
these two churches. The first one whose works were imperfect was dead;
the second had an open door set before it because it had kept the word
of the Lord. What the Lord thus spoke to the Churches collectively
must apply to the individuals comprising the society, and hence those
who shall have an open door (into heaven) set before them must keep
the commandments of God. In these cases God proceeded {426} on the
principle referred to in the writings of St. James, that faith is
manifested by works (James ii: 18, etc.). The following passage is also
pertinent in this connection: "For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision
availeth nothing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love"
(Gal. v: 6). The plain proposition herein affirmed is that nothing
avails in Christ Jesus but a "faith which worketh." It must operate
in or by love; it is manifested by works. If it is not, it avails
nothing, being dead. God measures faith by works--by the keeping of His
commandments.

The following Scripture is very decisive:

    "When the Son of Man shall come in His glory, and all the holy
    angels with Him, then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory:
    and before Him shall be gathered all nations: and He shall separate
    them one from another, as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the
    goats: and He shall set the sheep on His right hand, but the goats
    on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on His right hand,
    Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
    you from the foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and
    ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a
    stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick,
    and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then
    shall the righteous answer Him, saying, Lord, when we saw Thee an
    hungered, and fed Thee? or thirsty, and gave Thee drink? when saw
    we Thee a stranger, and took Thee in? or naked, and clothed Thee?
    or when saw we Thee sick, or in prison, and came unto Thee? And
    the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
    inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
    brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall He say also unto them
    on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
    prepared for the devil and his angels: for I was an hungered, and
    ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was
    a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not:
    sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also
    answer Him, saying, Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, or athirst,
    or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not
    minister unto Thee? Then shall He answer them, saying, Verily I say
    unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these,
    ye did it not to me. And these shall go away into everlasting
    punishment: but the righteous into life eternal" (Matt. xxv: 31-46).

This scene, joyous on the one hand, but dark and terrible as death
on the other, is a plain revelation of the principle which shall
prevail in the court of heaven at the great day of judgment. Those
whom the Savior calls cursed, and whom He overwhelms with everlasting
punishment, are not permitted to plead justification by their belief
alone. It is an awful question of practical godliness, of righteous
works. The devils themselves believe and tremble, and those who do no
more must take up their miserable abode with them. Such is the {427}
decree of Almighty God. The teachings of Scripture are as plain as they
can be expressed in human language, that those who do not manifest
their faith by godly works are under condemnation. We learn further
from the Scriptures that the righteous works specially mentioned in
the foregoing quotation are not the only ones required to entitle a
person to eternal life. For instance: "And when He was gone forth into
the way, there came one running, and kneeled to Him, and asked Him,
Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? And
Jesus said unto him . . . Thou knowest the commandments: Do not commit
adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud
not, Honor thy father and mother. And he answered and said unto Him,
Master, all these I have observed from my youth. Then Jesus beholding
him, loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way,
sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have
treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me" (Mark
x: 17-21).

A plain question was thus propounded, and it was definitely answered.
Christ insisted upon a keeping of the commandments of God; we are to
follow Him--to do as He did, that is, devote our lives to doing the
will of the Father. The Savior assured His questioner that such was
the way to inherit eternal life. This doctrine is pointedly put in
Matthew xix: 17, thus: "But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the
commandments."

Again: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved" (Mark xvi:
16).

Now, all men believe in the truth of the doctrine taught in the text
just quoted, or they do not. If they do not, they cannot believe in
Christ as a Being who is full of "grace and truth," as the Scripture
asserts. If we admit for a moment that He comes short in the principle
of truth, we shatter at once the very foundation of belief and
confidence, and doubt is the inevitable result. If Christ's word is
doubted, there is no confidence in Him. It follows, therefore, that
those who do not believe in the truth of the text do not believe in
Christ. But all concede that without this belief no one can obtain
eternal life. Those who do believe the truth of the text cannot say
that belief alone is sufficient for salvation, since it is expressly
stated that "he that believeth _and is baptized_ shall be saved."
Christ's own statement respecting the matter is final with all those
that believe in Him.

The following Scriptures are submitted:

{428}

    "And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
    say?" (Luke vi: 46). "But He said, yea, rather, blessed are they
    that hear the word of God, and keep it" (Luke xi: 28). "And this
    is the commandment, that we should believe on the name of His Son
    Jesus Christ, and love one another, as He gave us commandment. And
    he that keepeth His commandments dwelleth in Him, and He in him"
    (1 John iii: 23, 24). "If ye love me, keep my commandments. He
    that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth
    me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will
    love him, and will manifest myself to him" (John xiv: 15, 21).
    "Though He were a Son, yet learned He obedience by things which He
    suffered; and being made perfect, He became the author of eternal
    salvation unto all them that obey Him" (Heb. v: 8, 9). "What doth
    it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have
    not works? Can faith save him?" (James ii: 14). "He that saith he
    abideth in Him ought himself also so to walk, even as He walked" (1
    John ii: 6). "But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without
    works is dead? Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when
    he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Seest thou how faith
    wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect? And
    the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and
    it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the
    Friend of God. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified,
    and not by faith only. Likewise, also, was not Rahab the harlot
    justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and had
    sent them out another way? For as the body without the spirit is
    dead, so faith without works is dead also" (James ii: 20-26).
    "Blessed are they that do His commandments, that they may have
    right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into
    the city" (Rev. xxii: 14).

    "_Meddle not with any man for his religion; for all governments
    ought to permit every man to enjoy his religion unmolested. No man
    is authorized to take away life in consequence of difference of
    religion, which all laws and governments ought to protect_."

    --_Joseph Smith_.

{429}



THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

ITS RELIGION, HISTORY, CONDITION AND DESTINY. BY JAMES H. ANDERSON, OF
SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH. 1902.

    A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
    tree bring forth good fruit.--_Matt. vii, 18_.

Of the religious denominations now in existence among men, none have
attracted such attention from the others as the organization known as
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the members of which
are popularly, though erroneously, called "Mormons," because of their
belief in the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, a record of
the ancient inhabitants of America. In every nation where the fame of
this Church has spread, and where its Elders have appeared to teach
their faith, one feature which stands preeminent is the bitterness with
which they are opposed, without even the opportunity of being heard,
principally by professed believers in Christianity.

Some there are who are practical in their adherence to the doctrine of
religious toleration, and whose expansive minds lead them to refrain
from passing judgment till they hear the case fairly stated. They
hesitate to follow popular clamor, preferring to ascertain the truth
for themselves, rather than give assent to the voice of prejudice and
bigotry which demanded the life of Jesus of Nazareth because He claimed
to be the Son of God. But these are the exception; the rule has been
to accept without question assertions made against the Latter-day
Saints, and to decline to listen to anything in the way of denial
or justification. With this prominent fact before us, it is beyond
dispute that to this organization above all others in this generation
must be applied the saying, "For as concerning this sect, we know that
everywhere it is spoken against."

Doubtless much of this antagonism is due to ignorance of the true
belief, aims and condition of the Latter-day Saints. Certainly it is
largely because of gross misrepresentations by {430} those who have
constituted themselves their enemies. The reason for assuming this
position can be left for explanation to those who occupy it. The
purpose of the present occasion is not to consider that branch of
the subject, but rather to present the doctrines believed in by the
Latter-day Saints, and the reason for that belief. The limited time at
our disposal will admit of only a brief exposition of those doctrines;
all who are desirous of more elaborate explanation may obtain it from
the published works of the Church, and from its Elders, who will be
pleased to present to investigators the Gospel message which they are
proclaiming to the world. The present opportunity is sufficient for but
an abridged statement, in plain and simple language, of the religious
system under consideration.

This Church presents no formula of religious dogmas. Its creed is:
The direct revelation of God to His children. As He is without
variableness, and is no respecter of persons, so His laws are
unchangeable; and whatsoever He gives by the voice of revelation is a
law unto the Saints. The organization of this Church was effected at
Fayette, New York, on Sunday, the sixth day of April, 1830. Shortly
after this event, its presiding Apostle and Prophet, Joseph Smith, was
asked for a concise statement of what he and his people believed, and
in reply he wrote the following:

ARTICLES OF FAITH OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY
SAINTS.

    1. We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus
    Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

    2. We believe that men will be punished for their own sins and not
    for Adam's transgression.

    3. We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may
    be saved, by obedience to the laws, and ordinances of the Gospel.

    4. We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the
    Gospel are: First, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second,
    Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins;
    fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

    5. We believe that a man must be called of God by "prophecy, and by
    the laying on of hands," by those who are in authority, to preach
    the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

    6. We believe in the same organization that existed in the
    primitive Church, viz: Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers,
    Evangelists, etc.

    {431} 7. We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation,
    visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, etc.

    8. We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is
    translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the
    word of God.

    9. We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now
    reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and
    important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

    10. We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the
    restoration of the Ten Tribes. That Zion will be built upon this
    continent. That Christ will reign personally upon the earth, and
    that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisaic glory.

    11. We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according
    to the dictates of our conscience, and allow all men the same
    privilege, let them worship how, where or what they may.

    12. We believe in being subjects to kings, presidents, rulers and
    magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law.

    13. We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous,
    and in doing good to all men; indeed we may say that we follow the
    admonition of Paul, "We believe all things, we hope all things,"
    we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all
    things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely or of good report or
    praiseworthy, we seek after these things.

The position taken by the Prophet Joseph Smith and those who have given
heed to the doctrines he presented is that they have no new system of
religion to offer to the world, but that their message is the fulness
of the everlasting Gospel; the Gospel which Paul said was "the power
of God unto salvation, to every one that believeth;" the Gospel of
which the Bible bears record, and which the Lord Jesus Christ and His
disciples taught as the commandment of God to His children. While they
testify that it is a new revelation to them in this dispensation,
"the latter days," and that they received through heavenly messengers
sent from the throne of the great Jehovah all the knowledge they
possess of the plan of salvation, and also the authority to preach
the Gospel and administer in its ordinances, they point out that it
is the same Gospel and divine message that was revealed to man in
ancient days; the "one faith" of which Paul spake to the Ephesians; the
Everlasting Gospel, the plan instituted by God for the salvation of His
children--unchangeable, eternal, and transcendently perfect.

Upon this presentation of the case, then, are they to be judged. They
thus place every principle or doctrine within the field of comparison
with the Holy Scriptures, both in the Old and the New Testament.

{432}

THE GODHEAD.

The first of the Articles of Faith declares a belief "in God the
Eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost."
That is, that the Father is a personage of spirit, glory and power,
possessing all perfection and fulness; the Son a personage of
tabernacle also, who is the express image of His Father, and possesses
the same fulness with the Father, in whose image also man is created;
and the Holy Ghost, that which bears record of the Father and the Son,
the life-giving element in all nature, the agent of God's power, by
which, through faith, all things are controlled. These three constitute
the Supreme governing power, the Godhead, and are one--above all, and
in all, and through all--omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent.

The idea thus set forth is that in form man is the image of his
Creator. The Bible contains no suggestion of a similarity in form with
any of the other creations of the Almighty. But with respect to man
it is distinctly expressed in Genesis i: 26, 27: "And God said, Let
us make man in our own image, after our likeness, and let them have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth. So God created man in His own image; in
the image of God created He him; male and female created He them."

Paul, in writing of God, says that Jesus was the "express image of His
person" (Hebrews i: 3), being "in the form of God" (Phil. ii: 6). In
the record which Matthew has made of the Lord's baptism, he describes
the action of the three who constitute the Godhead: Jesus receiving
the baptism of water, the "Spirit of God descending like a dove and
lighting upon Him," and a voice--the voice of the Father--uttering from
heaven, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matt,
iii: 16, 17). The Redeemer of the world Himself testifies of their
individuality: "For as the Father hath life in Himself; so hath He
given to the Son to have life in Himself; and hath given Him authority
to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of man" (John v: 26,
27); "Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto
you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said, I go unto the
Father: for my Father is greater than I" (John xiv: 28); "Nevertheless,
I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away; for if I
go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I
will {433} send him unto you" (John xviii: 7); "But when the Comforter
is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of
Truth, which proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of me" (John
xv: 26).

In the solemn prayer offered up before His betrayal, the Divine Master
besought His Father, in behalf of His disciples, "That they all may
be one; as Thou, Father, art in me, and I in Thee, that they also may
be one in us: that the world may believe that Thou hast sent me. And
the glory which Thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be
one, even as we are one" (John xvii: 21, 22). The unity of purpose and
action in all things constitutes the oneness. This union Jesus sought
to bring to His Apostles, that, each having his distinct personality,
they might be one, "even as we are one."

MEN JUDGED BY THEIR WORKS.

"We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for
Adam's transgression."

By this transgression death came into the world, that men might gain
the experience of a mortal probation. But that man should be held
responsible for an act in which he had no agency would evidently be an
injustice. Our Father, being a just God, must therefore deal justly
with His children. What is the doctrine of the Scriptures respecting
the responsibility of men? In Jeremiah xvii: 10, it is announced: "I
the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings." As
the laws of truth and justice are inflexible in their operation and
effect, judgment as certainly follows evil as blessings result from
good deeds.

The beloved Apostle, in recording his vision of the judgment, tells
us: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the
books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of
life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead
which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were
in them: and they were judged every man according to their works"
(Rev. xx: 12, 13). Language can be no plainer to inform mankind of the
evidence that will be adduced for or against them at the judgment-seat
of Christ. It will be their deeds; and from the judgment they will make
no appeal, for they cannot but realize its justice.

By the divine law, man is answerable for his own sins.

{434} He is not compelled to bear the wrongs of another in the reward
which he will receive at God's judgment. The transgression of Adam was
not ours, and can have no ill effects upon us; it rather becomes a
blessing by the mercy of Jehovah. The Latter-day Saints believe that,
as by Adam death came into the world, without our action, so is life
the free gift to all men, through the atonement of the Lord Jesus.
This is the doctrine of the Bible. Paul expresses it thus: "Wherefore,
as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: therefore as by
the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even
so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life" (Romans v: 12, 18). The Lord has permitted no
doubt to remain respecting the sins for which men will be punished and
the good for which they will be rewarded. His word is: "For the Son of
man shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels; and then He
shall reward every man according to his works" (Matt. xvi: 27). The
testimony which He gave to John the Divine on the Isle of Patmos was:
"I will give every one of you according to your works" (Rev. ii: 23).
"And behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every
man according as his work shall be" (Rev. xxii: 12).

THE ATONEMENT.

"We believe that through the atonement of Christ all mankind may be
saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel."

By this atonement is brought the victory over death; the resurrection
of the body to life; the raising of man to a position where he is not
subject to death. But it goes farther in the article of faith read. It
brings salvation by obedience to the Gospel. Salvation, then, is more
than a redemption from the fall. The latter comes to man without his
agency, so far as the mere restoration to life is concerned. That is
the doctrine which the Apostles taught: "For since by man came death,
by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. xv: 21, 22). Since
the Savior brought to pass the resurrection and the life, His atonement
has a universal application, and "there shall be a resurrection of the
dead, both of the just and unjust" (Acts xxiv: 15).

Does the atonement do more? The Latter-day Saints reply in the
affirmative. Matthew (chap. i: 21) records that the {435} angel
declared to Joseph, when foretelling the birth of the infant Jesus,
"For He shall save His people from their sins." The Apostle Peter says:
"Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts iv: 12).
By obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel, salvation comes
to man; it is that which is added to the children of men by the atoning
blood of the Redeemer, when the requirements of His Gospel are complied
with. Until this is done, there is no salvation from sin. The Apostle
John makes this unequivocal declaration: "This then is the message
which we have heard of Him, and declare unto you, that God is light,
and in Him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship
with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth; but if
we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship one
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from
all sin" (1 John i: 5, 7). If we would be cleansed from all sin by the
blood of Christ Jesus, the condition is that "we walk in the light as
He is in the light." If this be not our course, the Apostle says, "we
lie and do not the truth." To these teachings is placed the seal and
testimony of the Divine Master Himself, in His sermon on the mount:
"Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in
heaven" (Matt. vii: 21). "In vain do ye worship me," said He to those
who followed the tradition of men instead of keeping "the commandment
of God" (Mark vii: 7, 8).

THE GOSPEL ORDINANCES--FAITH.

"We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are:
First--Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ."

The principle of faith is the moving cause of all action in intelligent
beings. Faith in the Lord is the fundamental principle leading to
obedience to His will. It is the assurance which we have of unseen
things. By its exercise we are alone able to approach the throne of
grace. "Without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he that
cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek Him." (Heb. xi: 6). It is not a mere passive
belief; but being a principle of action and power, it inculcates
works in harmony with itself. The Savior says: "Let not your heart be
troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, He that believeth on me, the {436} works that I do shall he
do also; and greater works than these shall he do, because I go unto my
Father" (John xiv: 1, 12).

It is the belief of the Latter-day Saints that the Gospel is the
working law of Christ; that faith in Him, to have life, must be
accompanied by works in accord with the mental exercise of faith. As
the Apostle James says: "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceiving your own selves" (i: 22). This Apostle writes, "For
as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is
dead also;" and in the second chapter of his epistle (verse 14-24) he
states: "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath
faith, and have not works? Can faith save him? If a brother or sister
be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them,
Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them
not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit?
Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. Yea, a man
may say, Thou hast faith and I have works: shew me thy faith without
thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works. Thou believest
that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and
tremble. But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works
is dead? Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had
offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Seest thou how faith wrought with
his works, and by works was faith made perfect? And the scripture was
fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto
him for righteousness: and he was called the Friend of God. Ye see then
how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only."

The Lord said, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and
great commandment" (Matt, xxii: 37, 38). He also explains what it is
to love God: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is
that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and
I will love him, and will manifest myself to him" (John xiv: 21). This
is faith in and love of God: keeping His commandments.

REPENTANCE.

"Second--Repentance."

To those who, on the day of Pentecost, believed on the Apostles' words,
and had awakened within their hearts faith in the Lord Jesus, Peter
gave the law of the Gospel: "Repent, {437} and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call" (Acts ii: 38, 39). This law was universal in its
application. It was "to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call."

When John the Baptist came in the wilderness of Judea, as the messenger
before the Lord, preaching "the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God," he proclaimed, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand" (Matt. iii: 2). Of those who presented themselves
for baptism he required conformity to the doctrine which preceded it.
If they had not repented, the ordinance of baptism was refused to
them. When many of the Pharisees and Sadducees came, he called them a
"generation of vipers," and demanded that they "bring forth therefore
fruits meet for repentance" (Matt. iii: 7, 8). God "commandeth all men
everywhere to repent"--to turn from evil and walk in righteousness, for
therein only is salvation. The Lord says, "Except ye repent ye shall
all likewise perish" (Luke xiii: 3).

BAPTISM.

"Third--Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins." To the
repentant believer this is the "baptism of repentance for the remission
of sins" taught by John the Baptist (Mark i: 4). On the day of
Pentecost, Peter pointed the way to salvation, "Repent, and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins"
(Acts ii: 38). When the jailer sought to be saved, Paul and Silas
"spake unto him the word of the Lord," and he "was baptized, he and all
his, straightway" (Acts xvi: 30-33).

So important is this ordinance for admission into the Church of God,
that the Lord Jesus insisted on receiving it at the hands of John the
Baptist, who was authorized to administer it. John had preached that
there should come after him One who should baptize "with the Holy Ghost
and with fire," and when Jesus presented Himself on Jordan's banks, the
Prophet recognized that mightier One. He felt his own weakness in the
presence of the Son of God, and said, "I have need to be baptized of
Thee, and comest Thou to me?" But Jesus knew the law of God. He knew
that it was necessary for even the Son of Man to enter at the door,
and obey the ordinance which His Father had appointed. Therefore He
answered {438} John, "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us
to fulfil all righteousness" (Matt. iii: 15). Then the Savior of the
world went down into the river Jordan, and was baptized of John. When
He came out of the water, there was given that glorious manifestation
of the approval by His Father of the act of submission to the divine
law, "and lo, the heavens were opened unto Him, and He saw the Spirit
of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon Him: and lo, a voice
from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased"
(Matt. iii: 16, 17).

If it was necessary for the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, to
receive the ordinance of baptism at the hands of one having authority
to administer it, that He might "fulfil all righteousness," wherein
can sinful man hope to enter by any other way? And when that act of
obedience to law on the part of the Divine Master was signalized by the
glorious descent upon Him of the Holy Ghost, and brought forth from the
Eternal Father the solemn declaration that He was well pleased with the
Son who had just passed through the baptism of water, who among men
dare say that the ordinance is vain, and useless, and non-essential;
that it is not of paramount importance to those who would do the will
of the Father?

The Lord also declared that the baptism of John was "the counsel of
God"--this ordinance that was "the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins." Said Jesus: "All the people that heard him, and
the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John;
but the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him" (Luke vii: 29, 30). As the Lord
went forth in His ministry, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, there
came to Him Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. To him Jesus said: "Except
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God" (John iii:
3). Nicodemus did not fully comprehend this saying, and made further
inquiry, receiving a reply in language that none need misunderstand:
"Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John iii: 5).
Therefore, when the Master commissioned His disciples and sent them
out, after they had been "endowed with power from on high," the command
which they received and obeyed was: "Go ye, therefore, and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of
the world" (Matt, xxviii: 19, 20).

{439} In this labor of the ministry, to which they had been called and
ordained of the Lord, He fulfilled His promise, and was with them:
"And they went forth and preached everywhere, the Lord working with
them, and confirming the word with signs following" (Mark xvi: 20). The
Apostles taught: "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins" (Acts ii: 38); "Know ye not,
that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized
into His death? Therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death:
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have
been planted together in the likeness of His death, we shall be also
in the likeness of His resurrection" (Romans vi: 3-5); "Buried with
Him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with Him through the faith
of the operation of God, who hath raised Him from the dead" (Col. ii:
12). Here, then, is the Gospel doctrine: Baptism by immersion for the
remission of sins, performed by one having authority; the birth, the
burial, the planting in the watery element, without which ordinance the
Lord has said that no man can enter the kingdom of heaven.

BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD.

It may be suggested that there are millions of the human family who
have not had the opportunity of receiving of the baptism of repentance
by one having divine authority--millions who never even heard of the
name of Jesus Christ. The Latter-day Saints believe that the Gospel
provides for all; that there is and can be no exception; that every
one who will may partake of the waters of life freely; that God is
no respecter of persons, but judges men by their works. A plan of
salvation that is adapted to the few, that does not open the door
to every being within the great brotherhood of man, is unworthy of
the Creator and God of the universe. The Gospel of the Lord must be
perfect, even as He is perfect, and reach to all humanity.

The query is made, How did the thief who died on the cross enter
the Kingdom of Heaven; there is no record of his baptism? Let the
Scriptures give the answer: "And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me
when Thou comest into Thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I
say unto thee, to-day shalt thou be with me in paradise" (Luke xxiii:
42, 43). The Lord did not say he could enter His Kingdom, for He told
Nicodemus that to do that is was necessary to be "born of the {440}
water and of the Spirit;" but He promised the penitent thief that on
that day he should be with Him in paradise. Is that not heaven? Let us
examine and see, for on the proper ascertainment of this fact depends a
great principle of truth.

The body of Jesus was three days in the tomb, when the spirit again
entered into it. When the Redeemer had risen, Mary came to the
sepulchre and found that the body of her Master was not there. She
began to inquire, when she heard a voice which she recognized as that
of the Lord, to whom she turned. "Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not,
for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say
unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and
your God" (John xx: 17). Here is the testimony of Jesus Himself, that
during the three days subsequent to His crucifixion, while His body lay
in the tomb, His spirit did not go to heaven or the presence of His
Father. Logically, it must follow, neither did that of the thief.

Where, then, did He go? As Jesus was not in His Father's presence
during these three days, where was He? The Scriptures have not left us
in doubt upon this point. Jesus transferred to Peter the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and placed him at the head of the Twelve Apostles.
Surely he is a competent witness; he says: "For Christ also hath once
suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us to
God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by
which also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison" (1 Peter
iii: 18, 19). During the time of His absence from the body He was
preaching "unto the spirits in prison"--the place where the thief also
went.

This doctrine of preaching the Gospel to the dead was taught by the
Lord to His Apostles, just previous to His crucifixion: "Verily, verily
I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. Marvel
not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the
graves shall hear His voice" (John v: 25, 28). On the same subject, the
chief Apostle says: "For for this cause was the Gospel preached also to
them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the
flesh, but live according to God in the spirit" (1 Peter iv: 6).

The dead are to be "judged according to men in the flesh;" and, as the
Lord has declared that "except a man be born of the water and of the
Spirit" he cannot enter the Kingdom, what shall the dead who "hear
the voice of the Son of God" do? Is the Gospel plan imperfect in that
it does not provide a way {441} for those who have had no opportunity
to receive that birth? God forbid. Such an injustice cannot be. Paul,
writing to the Corinthians respecting the resurrection, says: "Else
what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise
not at all? Why then are they baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor. xv: 29).
The answer is complete: The dead may be officiated for by those who
dwell in the flesh.

This is the doctrine of salvation for the dead, an important part
of the glorious Gospel that is as broad as the universe, and from
everlasting to everlasting. By receiving the baptism for the dead,
those who have passed into the spirit world have opened to them the
door of the Kingdom of Heaven. "But one man cannot act in the place
of another," is the suggestion that comes. The objector has surely
forgotten, or has not contemplated the great truth that the whole
Gospel plan taught in the Scriptures rests upon the vicarious atonement
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

THE HOLY GHOST.

"Fourth--Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost."

When the Apostle Peter preached to those who sought salvation, he said:
"Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call" (Acts
ii: 38, 39). Here is the offer to all of this blessed boon, the gift
of the Holy Ghost, after baptism for the remission of sins. It was to
them, and their children, and to all that are afar off. There was no
exclusiveness in this; the Gospel was open to all. By conforming to its
laws, men receive the benefits of their own obedience. It is the great
natural order of cause and effect. Comply with the conditions, the
result must follow. The sincerely repentant believer, baptized in the
proper manner, and by an authorized servant of God, is entitled to the
gift of the Holy Ghost as a matter of right.

How is he to receive it? Just as did the baptized believers under
the ministry of the Apostles: "Now, when the Apostles which were at
Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent
unto them Peter and John: who, when they were come down, prayed for
them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: (for as yet he was
fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus). Then laid they their hands on them, and they received
the Holy {442} Ghost" (Acts viii: 14-17); "through laying on of the
Apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given" (v. 18). The Ephesians also
"were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid
his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with
tongues and prophesied" (Acts xix: 5,6).

Of the office of the Holy Ghost the Lord says: "Howbeit when he, the
Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he
shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he
speak: and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me: for
he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you" (John xvi: 13,
14). Here is the promise of guidance and revelation by the Holy Ghost.
Its gifts are wisdom, knowledge, faith, healing, working of miracles,
discernment of spirits, divers kinds of tongues, etc. (1 Cor. xii:
4-11). Wherever the Holy Ghost is bestowed, there are its gifts and
graces manifest.

DIVINE AUTHORITY.

"We believe that a man must be called of God, by 'prophecy, and by
the laying on of hands,' by those who are in authority, to preach the
Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

The testimony of Scripture upon this is that Jesus "ordained twelve,
that they should be with Him, and that He might send them forth to
preach, and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils"
(Mark iii: 14, 15). To His Apostles He said: "Ye have not chosen me,
but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring
forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever you
shall ask of the Father in my name, He may give it you" (John xv: 16);
and of them, in praying to His Father, He testified: "As Thou has sent
me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world" (John
xvii: 18). His Father had sent Him and had "given Him authority,"
and in like manner He gave authority to His Apostles. They in turn
commissioned others to act in the ministry--"they ordained them Elders
in every church" (Acts xiv: 23). As Paul has said, "No man taketh this
honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (Heb.
v: 4). Aaron was called by the voice of God, through Moses (Exodus iv:
14, 15).

The acts of those who are authorized to officiate in the ordinances
of the Gospel--to whom are committed the keys of the Kingdom--are
recognized by the Lord, and are given full force. "Whatsoever thou
shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt
loose on earth shall be {443} loosed in heaven" (Matt, xvi: 19). But
those not authorized receive no such recognition.

OFFICERS.

"We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive
Church, viz.: Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Evangelists, etc."

The Apostle Paul taught that there was "one Lord, one faith, one
baptism," and said of the Redeemer, "Wherefore He saith, when He
ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.
And He gave some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; and some, Evangelists;
and some, Pastors and Teachers" (Eph. iv: 8, 11). He also preached:
"Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God
hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets,
thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps,
governments, diversities of tongues" (1 Cor. xii: 27, 28).

God set these in the Church, is the Apostle's testimony. Shall man say
that they are not proper? The Lord has never changed the organization;
on the contrary, these officers were given "for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body
of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fulness of Christ; that we henceforth be no more
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive" (Eph. iv: 12-14).

Is there work for the ministry? Are the Saints yet to be perfected? Are
we still far from the unity of the faith? Are we less than the stature
of the fulness of Christ in the knowledge of God? With the present
spectacle of jarring sects, religious discords, and disputations of
doctrines, no intelligent person would venture to give other than an
affirmative reply to these inquiries. There is evidently abundant work
for the ministry, and therefore a necessity for Apostles, Prophets, and
all the officers that God has set in His Church. Wherever that Church
is organized upon the earth, there will these officers be found, with
all the authority, gifts and powers that accompany the offices. The
church which has them not is not the Church of Christ, according to the
evidence presented by the word of God.

{444}

SPIRITUAL GIFTS.

"We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions,
healing, interpretation of tongues, etc."

These are the gifts of the Spirit, which Christ promised should follow
the believers. They are the signs which confirmed the preaching of the
Gospel by the Apostles: "And He said unto them, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and
is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.
And these signs shall follow them that believe: In my name shall they
cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them;
they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. So then
after the Lord had spoken unto them, He was received up into heaven,
and sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth and preached
everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with
signs following" (Mark xvi: 15-20).

Of these are the miracles wrought by our Lord and Savior. God hath
set in the Church "miracles, gifts of healings, helps, governments,
diversities of tongues" (1 Cor. xii: 26). Never at any time has He
said they should be done away. He is an unchangeable being, a God of
miracles to-day as much as at any period of the world's history. He
cannot be otherwise and still occupy His exalted position. He cannot
be shorn of His power to manifest the gifts of His Spirit among the
children of men, when the latter comply with His laws. His arm is not
shortened, or His power to save diminished. If miracles, and healings,
and prophecy, and the other gifts of the Spirit do not exist among men,
it is for the same reason that in ancient days the Lord Jesus, in "His
own country," "could do no mighty work, save that He laid His hands on
a few sick folk, and healed them," namely, "because of their unbelief"
(Mark vi: 6, 7).

Those who dwell on the earth to-day are equally the children of our
Father with those who lived nineteen centuries ago, and have an equal
claim on His blessings if they observe His laws and exercise the same
faith in Him as did His disciples anciently. "For the promise is unto
you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off," said Peter,
in his proclamation of the Gospel, of which Paul said, "But though we,
or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed" (Gal. i: 8).

{445}

THE APOSTASY.

The Latter-day Saints believe that but for the apostasy of the
primitive Christian Church, it would have remained with the same
organization, powers and ordinances; with Apostles, Prophets, healings,
miracles, and all the gifts of the Spirit, up to the present time.
That these ceased to exist among men is proof that there has been a
departure from the Gospel. If the organization had remained it would
have been in the same form as God placed it, and the true successors
to the Apostles would have followed their example when they filled the
vacancy made in the Twelve by Judas's apostasy--by selecting Matthias
to be numbered with the Apostles (Acts i: 26). But there was no
succession to the Twelve through the generations which succeeded them,
therefore the organization ceased to exist among men.

If there was to be an event of such importance in the world's history
as a great apostasy, surely the disciples would have had an intimation
of it through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. By reference to
their writings we find that they had this knowledge, and prophesied
concerning it. Paul wrote to Timothy that the time would come when men
would not endure sound doctrine, but would heap to themselves teachers,
and turn away from the truth. (2 Tim. iv: 3, 4). He also taught that in
the last days perilous times should come, when men should be "lovers
of pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof" (2 Tim. iii: 1-5).

To the Thessalonians was borne this testimony respecting the great
apostasy: "Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto Him, that ye be not
soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no
man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there
come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of
God, shewing himself that he is God. Remember ye not, that, when I was
yet with you, I told you these things? And now ye know what withholdeth
that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth
already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out
of the way" (2 Thess. ii: 1-7). The "mystery of iniquity" was making
its influence felt at that early day. Paul had warned {446} the people
of what was coming; as he says, "When I was yet with you I told you
these things."

In the record of the vision given to the Apostle John, which he says
was "the revelation of Jesus Christ," we are informed that John was
shown "things which shall be hereafter." Of one of the beasts which
he saw as typical of a power which should rise up in the earth, it is
said, "And it was given to him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues,
and nations" (Rev. xiii: 7).

This is some of the scriptural evidence concerning the great power
which was to deceive the nations of the earth and pervert the Gospel by
teaching men and women that Apostles and Prophets were not necessary,
and that the gifts of the Holy Ghost were done away, till Christendom
has been brought to the apostate condition in which it is to-day. So
complete was the work of this "mystery of iniquity," of the beast that
"made war with the Saints and overcame them," that it was necessary for
an angel to be sent from heaven with the Gospel message for mankind.
John says of this event: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of
heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on
the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people"
(Rev. xiv: 6).

THE BOOK OF MORMON.

"We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is translated
correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God."

For people who believe the Bible to be the word of God to also believe
that another record is His word, the two must be consistent with each
other. There can be no conflict between them. For both to be the word
of God, they must be divinely inspired, and their teachings be in
perfect harmony. While it would by no means be certain that a record
which has passed through so many hands as have the Bible manuscripts,
with a loss of some, at least, of the sacred writings, would contain a
reference to another record which was to be made by a separate branch
of the House of Israel, yet it would not be unreasonable to hope that
possibly an allusion to it might be found in some of the prophetic
writings.

This hope is not without foundation with respect to the Book of Mormon,
which is a history of a part of the House of Israel, on the American
continent. The Prophet Ezekiel says: {447} "The word of the Lord came
again unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick,
and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his
companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the
stick of Ephraim, and for all the House of Israel his companions: and
join them one to another into one stick: and they shall become one in
thine hand. And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee,
saying, Wilt thou not show unto us what thou meanest by these? Say unto
them, Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph,
which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows,
and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and they
shall be one in mine hand" (Ezekiel xxxvii: 15-19).

The "stick of Judah" is the record which we have of the Jews--the
Bible; the "stick of Ephraim" is the other record, which we have in
the Book of Mormon; and both records have become one in the hand of
the Lord. Hosea says that to Ephraim had been written the great things
of the law (Hosea xiii: 12), and the Savior informed His disciples of
others that He must visit: "And other sheep I have, which are not of
this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and
there shall be one fold, and one shepherd" (John x: 16). These other
sheep were to hear His voice--to receive a personal visit from Him.

The history of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is, briefly
stated, that its existence and whereabouts were revealed to the Prophet
Joseph Smith by an angel sent from heaven. This angel said his name was
Moroni, and that in the year A.D. 420 he had buried the sacred record
in the hill Cumorah, which is located in the northern part of the State
of New York. After Joseph had received several visits and had been
instructed by the heavenly messenger, the plates were entrusted to his
care, with a Urim and Thummim for their translation. Each plate was six
inches wide and eight inches long, and not quite as thick as common
tin. They were filled with engravings in Egyptian characters, and
bound together in a volume, as the leaves of a book, with three rings
running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in
thickness, a part of it being sealed. The characters on the unsealed
part were small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many
marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of
engraving. The Urim and Thummim consisted of two transparent stones set
in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate. The unsealed portion of
the plates was {448} translated, and the whole were again taken charge
of by the angel. The part which had been translated was published early
in 1830, as the Book of Mormon, according to the command of God. It is
an abridgment made by the Prophet Mormon, father of Moroni, from the
records of his forefathers. On the title page is this statement:

    Wherefore it is an abridgment of the record of the people of
    Nephi, and also of the Lamanites; written to the Lamanites who are
    a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile:
    written by way of commandment, and also by the Spirit of prophecy
    and of revelation. Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord,
    that they might not be destroyed; to come forth by the gift and
    power of God unto the interpretation thereof; sealed by the hand of
    Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by the
    way of Gentile; the interpretation thereof by the gift of God.

    An abridgment taken from the book of Ether also; which is a record
    of the people of Jared; who were scattered at the time the Lord
    confounded the language of the people when they were building a
    tower to get to heaven; which is to shew unto the remnant of the
    House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their
    fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that
    they are not cast off forever; and also to the convincing of
    the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD,
    manifesting Himself unto all nations. And now if there are faults,
    they are the mistakes of men: wherefore condemn not the things of
    God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgment-seat of Christ.

Several persons were permitted to view the plates, among the number
being the "Three Witnesses," who thus testify of what they saw and
heard:

    The Testimony of Three Witnesses.--Be it known unto all nations,
    kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that
    we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
    have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record
    of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren,
    and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which
    hath been spoken; and we also know that they have been translated
    by the gift and the power of God, for His voice hath declared it
    unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And
    we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon
    the plates; and they have been shewn unto us by the power of God,
    and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an
    angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before
    our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings
    thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and
    our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these
    things are true; and it is marvellous in our eyes, nevertheless the
    voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it;
    wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear
    testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in
    Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be
    found spotless {449} before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall
    dwell with Him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the
    Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God.
    Amen.

    Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Martin Harris.

From that testimony they never varied. They were separated from the
Latter-day Saints, having departed from the Church, to which they
belonged for a time after its organization. But nothing could induce
them to change their statement. It was true, and they knew it. In
their old age Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris returned to the Church.
David Whitmer never did. He was the last to survive, his death having
occurred in January, 1888, at Richmond, Missouri. When on his deathbed
he called his family and friends around him, and made to them a solemn
declaration that he knew the Book of Mormon, and his testimony thereto,
to be true.

Eight others also testify as follows:

    The Testimony of Eight Witnesses.--Be it known unto all nations,
    kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that
    Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shewn unto us
    the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of
    gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated,
    we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings
    thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and
    of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of
    soberness, that the saith Smith has shewn unto us, for we have
    seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got
    the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the
    world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen, and we
    lie not, God bearing witness of it.

    Christian Whitmer, Hiram Page, Jacob Whitmer, Joseph Smith, Sen.,
    Peter Whitmer, Jun., Hyrum Smith, John Whitmer, Samuel H. Smith.

Like the three, they never faltered in maintaining that what they had
subscribed to respecting the Book of Mormon was the truth, and was with
them an absolute knowledge.

Of further evidence concerning the authenticity of the Book of Mormon,
there is in this sketch an opportunity of saying but little. Regarding
the external proof, it must suffice to merely call attention to the
developments of archaeological research on the American continent. When
the Book of Mormon was first published it was the accepted theory of
the civilized world that {450} America was not peopled by any nation
of ancient times which had made marked progress in civilization. But
subsequently, from the appearance of Captain Dupaix's book in 1834-5,
followed by the evidence of Lord Kingsborough, Stevens and Catherwood,
Powell, and other well-known archaeologists and explorers, a change
came with respect to this matter, until now there is no doubt of the
advanced position reached by ancient American civilization, as well
as of the great antiquity of the native American races. The ruined
temples and crumbling palaces of the ancient cities of Uxmal, Copan,
Palenque, Quiche, and scores of others, whose architecture rivals
that of any contemporaneous cities of the Old World, bear silent but
incontrovertible testimony to the historical truth of the Book of
Mormon.

With internal evidence of its divine authenticity, the volume is amply
provided. It presents a code of ethics whose purity and godliness are
unexcelled by any publication that has seen the light of day. In its
pages there are no anachronisms and no contradictions. The various
writers are in perfect accord. Compared with the great truths of
science and nature, there are no absurdities and no inconsistencies.
Between it and the Bible there is complete harmony in doctrine and
in prophecy. It is a book that would be profitable reading to any
thoughtful person. No intelligent, honest and sincere seeker after
truth can give it thorough examination and consideration, with an
understanding of the circumstances under which it was brought forth,
without being convinced that in giving to the world the Book of Mormon,
God has wrought one of the greatest miracles of any age or time.

REVELATION.

"We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and
that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to
the kingdom of God."

When the Lord promised His disciples the Holy Ghost, He informed them
that it would teach them all things (John xiv: 20); "He shall receive
of mine, and shall show it unto you" (John xvi: 14). This was a direct
promise of revelation through the medium of the Holy Ghost, therefore
belief in revelation is a scriptural doctrine. It is the communication
to men of knowledge from God: "Howbeit. when He, the Spirit of Truth,
is come, He will guide you into all truth: for He shall not speak of
Himself; but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He speak; and He will
show you things to come" (John {451} xvi: 13). This is the word of
the Lord--that the Holy Ghost should reveal things to come. The same
condition which caused the withdrawal of the other gifts of the Spirit
also caused the withdrawal of the gift of revelation. It was because
of the apostasy--the unbelief of man. Never has the Lord said that
He would reveal no more to the children of men. But He has forbidden
men to add to or take from that which He reveals (Rev. xxii: 18, 19).
Whenever the Almighty has authorized servants upon the earth, there is
with them the gift of revelation. "Surely the Lord God will do nothing,
but He revealeth His secret unto His servants the Prophets" (Amos iii:
7). The Apostle says that if a man lacks wisdom, and asks in faith for
God to bestow it on him, He will do so liberally (James i: 5, 6).

RESTORATION OF THE GOSPEL.

The tidings which the Latter-day Saints bear to the world are, that
the Gospel has been restored to earth in this dispensation; that the
present is the time of which Paul wrote, "that in the dispensation of
the fulness of times He might gather together in one all things in
Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth; even in Him"
(Eph. i: 10). It is this restoration which John the Revelator saw in
vision on the Isle of Patmos, and of which he says: "And I saw another
angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to
preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and
kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God and
give glory to Him; for the hour of His judgment is come: and worship
Him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of
waters" (Rev. xiv: 6, 7).

The Latter-day Saints testify that this angel has appeared, and has
restored the Gospel, which is now being preached to the nations.
It is the same now as anciently, with all the gifts, powers and
blessings. Nothing is lacking. It is presented to all people for their
consideration. The most thorough investigation is invited. There is
nothing to conceal or hold back. It is not the province of the Gospel
to put its light under a bushel, but to entreat all men to come forward
and test its truth. "Prove all things; hold fast that which is good,"
was the admonition of the Apostle Paul; the same invitation is extended
to-day.

Men are given intelligence; they are in possession of reasoning power.
It is an insult to Deity to say that He forbids us to use these in
seeking for knowledge. He asks for intelligent {452} conformity to the
eternal laws of truth, not for blind obedience to the dogmas of men. He
has given to man his free agency. As expressed in the hymn:

  "Know this, that every soul is free
  To choose his life and what he'll be;
  For this eternal truth is given,
  That God will force no man to heaven.

  "He'll call, persuade, direct aright--
  Bless him with wisdom, love and light--
  In nameless ways be good and kind,
  But never force the human mind.

  "Freedom and reason make us men;
  Take these away, what are we then?
  Mere animals, and just as well
  The beasts may think of heaven or hell."

This free agency was recognized by the Divine Master who said to the
Jews, "Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal
life: and they are they which testify of me" (John v: 39). To this
testimony and counsel of the Lord the Latter-day Saints direct
attention.

OTHER DOCTRINES.

Of the other principles believed in by the Latter-day Saints there is
not upon this occasion opportunity to speak at length. These are: The
gathering of Israel; the Restoration of the Ten Tribes; the support of
Earthly Governments for the Protection of Human Rights; the Building
up of Zion and Rebuilding of Jerusalem; the Resurrection; the Second
Coming of Christ to reign as Lord of lords and King of kings--all
of which are doctrines of the Bible, as clearly maintained in its
teachings as those which have been spoken of.

The Latter-day Saints believe--indeed testify that they know they
are fulfilling the predicted gathering of Israel in the last days by
the command and power of God; that their gathering on the American
continent is upon the land of Zion, the land of Joseph, whose blessings
have prevailed "unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills" (Gen.
xlix: 26); that the mountain of the house of the Lord is "established
in the top of the mountains" (Micah iv: 1). With implicit faith that
the Lord will confirm their testimony, they declare that He has sent
His messenger before Him in latter days, to prepare the way for His
coming (Mala. iii: 1).

It may be well to refer to their ordinance of marriage, of which
there appears to be such a misunderstanding in the world. This can be
briefly stated. The Latter-day Saints believe {453} that marriage is
ordained of God; that He has revealed to them its everlasting covenant;
that when the ceremony is performed by His authority, the union of
husband and wife is eternal--that it is bound on earth and bound in the
heavens. "And they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more
twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not
man put asunder" (Mark x: 8, 9). It is a covenant that is entered into
voluntarily by the parties; there can be no compulsion in this, or in
any of the ordinances of the Gospel.

With the Latter-day Saints the principle of celestial marriage is the
union of husband and wife for time and eternity. They believe the
family relation exists in the celestial kingdom of God. They also have
pronounced views upon the purpose of the union of the sexes. They do
not believe that its object is the gratification of passion, but that
such an idea is wicked in its inception and damning in its practice.
They believe that a departure from the paths of virtue is punishable by
the severest penalties, and that the violation of the marriage covenant
is an offense which ranks next to the crime of murder.

A GLANCE AT HISTORY.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was born at Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont,
U. S. A., December 23, 1805, his father being a farmer. In the spring
of the year 1820, when Joseph was a little over fourteen years of age,
he became deeply interested in religious matters. He read the passage
in James i: 5: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that
giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given
him." With full reliance upon that promise in the Divine Word, this
humble lad prayed to God and received the heavenly manifestation. He
continued faithful and was instructed by messengers from heaven, and
received and brought forth the Book of Mormon. When these facts became
known to the people in the vicinity of where he resided, he was made
the object of false and slanderous reports, and severe persecutions.
Many attempts were made to kill him, and every device was used to get
the plates from him; but the Lord protected him, and people began to
believe his testimony. In 1829, John the Baptist came and ordained him
to the Aaronic Priesthood; in the same year the Apostles Peter, James
and John ordained him to the Apostleship.

In obedience to the command of God, the Church of Jesus Christ was
once more organized on the earth, with the promise from the Lord
that it would never again be taken from among {454} men; that it was
restored preparatory to the ushering in of Christ's millennial reign
on earth. Some of its members were ordained and sent out to preach.
Those who received their testimony and were baptized were filled with
the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and the word was confirmed
with signs following. The Church rapidly increased in membership, and
branches were organized in many of the States. A Temple was erected
in Kirtland, Ohio. The State of Missouri became the principal place
for the gathering of the people; but because they would not join in
the practices of the lawless element there, and were believers in an
unpopular religion, an organized mob drove them from their habitations,
contrary to law, justice and humanity, to wander on the bleak prairies,
in wintry weather, till they left the tracks of their bleeding feet on
the frozen ground. Men, women and children were subjected to the most
fiendish outrages--starved, tortured, butchered. This was in a land
that boasted of religious freedom and tolerance!

Finally, about twelve thousand who had escaped the exterminating order
of Missouri's mob found a resting place in Illinois, and built up the
beautiful city of Nauvoo. But the refuge was only temporary, for the
bigot and the criminal united in a relentless and bloody warfare upon
them. Less than six years after their expulsion from Missouri, their
Prophet was assassinated in Carthage jail, while in the hands of the
officers of the law, and under the pledged protection of the governor
of the State, Thomas Ford. This was on June 27, 1844. Joseph Smith had
committed no offense; he was guilty of no wrong. "The law cannot reach
him, but powder and ball shall!" was the cry of his murderers. The
blood of the martyred Prophet and his fellow-religionists still cries
to God for vengeance!

The enemies of the Saints, however, were doomed to disappointment, for
the death of the Prophet did not stop the work, or break up the Church
organization. The leadership devolved on the Twelve Apostles, with
Brigham Young as their President; even greater energy was displayed
than before, and the Temple at Nauvoo was soon completed. Fiendish
plots were laid, and barbarous plans adopted to blacken the character
of the "Mormon" people, and make them appear abominable in the eyes
of the public. Numerous atrocities were committed by the mobocrats,
who falsely attributed them to the Saints, and thus aroused public
indignation against them.

Hoping to secure immunity from these unjustifiable attacks, they
consented to move from the State, the mob agreeing to {455} allow them
to remain in peace a given time, so the exodus could be accomplished.
This agreement was soon disregarded by the persecutors, who were
reckless, and impatient to despoil the Saints. When a portion of the
latter had left Nauvoo, the remnant was attacked by an armed force,
and driven into Iowa in a destitute condition. General Thomas L. Kane,
of Philadelphia, who passed that way a few days afterward, related his
experience in a lecture before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania.
The following is an extract from his address: "Dreadful, indeed, was
the suffering of these forsaken beings; bowed and cramped by cold and
sunburn, alternating as each weary day and night dragged on, they were,
almost all of them, the crippled victims of disease. They were there
because they had no homes, nor hospital, nor poor-house, nor friends
to offer them any. They could not satisfy the feeble cravings of their
sick; they had not bread to quiet the fractious hunger-cries of their
children. Mothers and babes, daughters and grandparents, all of them
alike, were bivouacked in tatters, wanting even covering to comfort
those whom the sick shivers of fever were searching to the marrow.
These were Mormons, famishing in Lee County, Iowa, in the fourth week
of the month of September, in the year of our Lord 1846. The city--it
was Nauvoo, Illinois. The Mormons were the owners of that city, and the
smiling country around. And those who had stopped their plows, who had
silenced their hammers, their axes, their shuttles, and their workshop
wheels; those who had put out their fires, who had eaten their food,
spoiled their orchards, and trampled under foot their thousands of
acres of unharvested bread--these were the keepers of their dwellings,
the carousers in their Temple, whose drunken riot insulted the ears of
their dying."

Out into the trackless American wilds, into an Indian country, the
"Mormons" wended their way, weary and destitute, for more than fifteen
hundred miles, their pathway being marked by the graves of their dead.
The history of their privations and sufferings is harrowing in the
extreme. The lives of not less than a thousand of their number were
sacrificed in the relentless persecutions connected with the exodus
from Illinois. But God opened their way, and as a result of their
unity, humility and faith through severe tribulations and deep sorrows,
they were guided to a refuge in the valley of the Great Salt Lake.
Three years later, in 1850, Congress created the Territory of Utah.
Under the territorial form of government, the governor, secretary,
judges, marshals, postmasters, election and other territorial officers,
are appointed by the President of the United States.

{456} In their new home, the Saints increased in numbers and were
beginning to enjoy some of the comforts of life, as a reward of their
toil, when, in 1857, the national government was induced, through
the misrepresentations of some of its officials, to send an army
against the "Mormons," who prepared for another exodus, and to defend
themselves. But the time required in such an undertaking gave the
government an opportunity to discover that it had been misled and to
change its course. The record of the expedition, with its expenditure
of twenty millions of dollars, stands as a monument of the folly of
judging a matter hastily.

The current of popular opinion, however, had set in strongly against
the Saints, and it is difficult to change it; but the majority of
those with whom they are now in contact are not the lawless element
of Missouri and Illinois, so that the violence of former times is no
longer used against the body of the people where they are known. But
the adverse feeling caused legislation hostile to them. They bowed to
the law, content to leave the issue between those who raised their
hands against them and the God of Israel, in whose justice, mercy and
omnipotence they have perfect confidence. Their Church property was
seized by the government--property which was the voluntary gift of
Church members, for the support of the poor, the building of Temples,
and similar purposes. But with a better understanding of the motives
and lives of the Saints, the government recognized the great wrong
done, and sought to right it. The forfeited property not wasted in
litigation was restored, adverse legislation ceased, friendliness
superseded an unjust, mistaken antagonism, and in 1896 Utah was
admitted to statehood.

PRESENT CONDITION.

The results of the industry, integrity and thrift of the Saints, as
shown by their present condition, are a complete refutation of the
accusations of evil made against them. A corrupt tree cannot bring
forth good fruit. Utah, the chief centre of their gathering place, has
a population of 270,000, seventy-five per cent, being "Mormons." Ninety
percent of the heads of families live in their own houses and on their
own lands. The fruitful orchards, rich fields and farms, successful
industries and beautiful cities, towns and villages, present to the
view a paradise upon earth; while the vigor and cheerfulness of old
and middle-aged and young betoken the health, prosperity and happiness
which are God's own gifts to this people, in whose hearts dwells more
abundantly than in those {457} of any other community that love of God
and of their fellow men which is the fruit of a pure and noble life in
the service of the great Creator.

Not alone in Utah do the Latter-day Saints find a home. Their hundreds
of settlements bedeck the mountain valleys from the province of
Alberta, in Canada, through Montana, Oregon, Idaho, Nevada, Wyoming,
Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico, in the United States, to
Chihuahua, in Old Mexico, on either side of a line which reaches
fifteen hundred miles along the backbone of the American continent.

As an ecclesiastical organization, the first officers in the Church are
divinely commissioned Apostles of the Lord Jesus, and divine authority
is possessed by the whole body of Priesthood, down to the office of
Deacon. Almost the entire male membership of the Church is included in
this classification; while there are organizations for the women and
children. Over four hundred districts, or wards, are united in larger
organizations called Stakes of Zion, all combining in a perfect system.

FUTURE DESTINY.

The Saints have an abiding faith in the future glorious destiny of
the work in which they are engaged. From its inception there has been
steady and rapid progress. Its Elders have carried the glad tidings
to the nations as God has given them strength. They have not preached
for money nor divined for hire. Freely they have received; freely they
give. Persecution has followed those who have obeyed the Gospel, just
as it did anciently. But with each wave of adversity the Church has
grown stronger, and its opponents have been restricted in their ability
to inflict injuries on its members. Each successive blow of its foes
has fallen more lightly than the one which preceded it; while the
Saints have been brightened and made better by the experience gained
in drawing nearer to the Lord. No Latter-day Saint has any doubt of
the ultimate triumph of the principles he has received in the Gospel.
They form the plan of life, the power of God unto salvation. The Church
is organized never again to be overcome. Its destiny is to continue
to increase until its Founder and Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, will
establish His eternal kingdom, and righteousness shall rule from the
rivers to the ends of the earth.

THE GOSPEL MESSAGE.

The purpose of the Gospel is to lead us back to God, improved by the
knowledge and experience we have gained. {458} There is no truth in
any department of life that is without its pale; no knowledge that is
beyond its reach. Its truth is the sum of all existence, the knowledge
of things that have been, that are, and that will be. God is truth, and
His Gospel is the plan whereby we may be saved in His presence. This
is the doctrine that our Lord and Savior taught; this is the message
given to the Latter-day Saints, and which they proclaim to the world.
They call upon all men to repent and do the will of God. They invite
sincere seekers after truth everywhere. They present to the world an
example of the marvelous power of the Gospel they have obeyed. By their
fruits they show its effects. They have solved the problem of a happy,
prosperous and contented life, free from sin and sorrow, from poverty
and idleness, from hatred and hypocrisy. They present to the rest of
mankind the example of a people who put into practice their belief in
being honest, industrious, true, chaste, benevolent, and in doing good
to all men. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report,
or praiseworthy, they seek after those things.

To all men they bear the message of the Gospel which has made them
thus. They leave no room for deceit and delusion. They claim to have
divine authority and divine principles, and they offer the proof, which
is in the reach of every true, honest, virtuous man and woman. It is
the test which the Lord has commanded them to proffer to mankind, the
same that He applied to Himself: "My doctrine is not mine, but His that
sent me. If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John vii: 16, 17).

There can be no mistake about it, for if it be not of God, He will not
give the knowledge. But tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints bear
witness that they have received the testimony from Him. It is true,
and we bear you witness now of its truth. Hereby we know that we know
Him, that we keep His commandments. The Apostle John says: "Whosoever
transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God.
He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father
and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that
biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds" (2 John: 9-11).

That we do bring this doctrine, and that it is true, is the testimony
which we now give, and which we will meet before {459} the pleasing bar
of the Great Jehovah, the eternal judge of both quick and dead. And may
the grace of God the Father, whose throne is high in the heavens, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who sitteth on the right hand of His power until
all things shall become subject unto Him, be and abide forever with
those who seek to serve Him in spirit and in truth. Amen.

    "_When the day comes in which the Kingdom of God will bear rule,
    the flag of the United States will proudly flutter unsullied on
    the flagstaff of liberty and equal rights, without a spot to sully
    its fair surface; the glorious flag our fathers have bequeathed to
    us will then be unfurled to the breeze by those who have power to
    hoist it aloft and defend its sanctity_."

    --_Brigham Young_.

    "_How consoling to the mourners, when they are called to part with
    a husband, wife, father, mother, child or dear relative, to know
    that although the earthly tabernacle is laid down and dissolved,
    they shall rise again to dwell in everlasting burnings in immortal
    glory, not to sorrow, suffer or die any more; but they shall be
    heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ_."

    --_Joseph Smith, The Prophet_.

{460}



A WORD ABOUT SUCCESSION. (1907.)

(_From Saturday's "News_.")

A correspondent writing from Parker, Idaho, requests a reply, through
the columns of the "News," to the question, by whom was President
Young ordained to the presidency of the Church? It appears that the
emissaries of the Reorganite faction have discovered in that question
a fruitful source of sophistical controversy, and that they are
triumphantly asking it wherever they go.

The proper reply is, he was ordained by the Prophet Joseph to that
calling, when the Prophet, prompted by the Holy Spirit, conferred upon
the Twelve Apostles the power and authority he himself had received.
The following statement of facts by Elder Joseph F. Smith, Jr., can be
verified by the authentic records of the Church:

The Prophet Joseph earnestly desired that his brother Hyrum should
live to succeed him in the presidency of the Church. In the year 1841,
by command of the Lord, he ordained him to this exalted position, as
is quite evident from the following, section 124, verses 94-5, of the
Doctrine and Covenants:

    And from this time forth I appoint unto him (Hyrum Smith) that he
    may be a Prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my Church as
    well as my servant Joseph.

    That he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph, and that he
    shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto
    him the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with
    the same blessing and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts
    of the priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant
    Oliver Cowdery.

From this revelation we learn that the Lord appointed Hyrum Smith both
as Patriarch and to act in concert with his brother Joseph in the
presidency of the Church. In accordance with this revelation, Hyrum was
so ordained January 24, 1841. This was not in the sense of a counselor
to {461} Joseph, for at this very appointment Hyrum was removed as
counselor to the president, and William Law was ordained in his stead.

Joseph and Hyrum continued to so act from this time forth until their
martyrdom, June 27, 1844. Shortly before the martyrdom the Prophet
tried with all his power to persuade Hyrum not to accompany him to
Carthage, knowing full well the fate that awaited them there. Had Hyrum
stayed behind and thereby remained in mortality, he would, by virtue of
his position and ordination received in 1841, have become the president
of the Church. His brother intended that this should be (_Times and
Seasons 5: 683_), but through his faithfulness to, and love for, his
brother, Hyrum fell a martyr before the Prophet Joseph did.

Now mark! The Lord, who knew that Hyrum should receive a martyr's crown
at Carthage, in the winter of 1843-4, commanded the Prophet to confer
upon the heads of the twelve Apostles every key, power and principle
that the Lord had sealed upon his head. The Prophet declared that he
knew not why, but the Lord commanded him to endow the twelve with these
keys and priesthood, and after it was done, he rejoiced very much,
saying in substance, "Now, if they kill me, you have all the keys and
all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others and the powers
of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom as fast as you will
be able to build it up, and upon your shoulders will the responsibility
of leading this people rest." (_Times and Seasons 5: 651_.)

In this manner the Prophet ordained the twelve Apostles, which body
constitutes the second quorum of the Church, equal in authority with
the first presidency. _Doc. and Cov. 107: 23-24_, with the keys of
the kingdom. Brigham Young was president of the twelve, and upon him
devolved the duty of presiding.

Therefore, after the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the twelve
assumed, by authority of their office, the duty to preside over
the Church. Later, when through revelation the quorum of the first
presidency was reorganized with three presidents--Brigham Young and
Counselors Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, they claimed, and
rightfully, that since they were ordained under the hands of Joseph
Smith and from him had received all the keys and powers of the
priesthood which the Prophet held, it would have been superfluous
to have been ordained again. They were in this capacity, however,
sustained by the unanimous vote of the Saints, {462} which was
essential to make such ordination of force in the Church.

There is an abundance of testimony to prove that the Prophet did
so ordain the twelve, some of which can be found in the _Times and
Seasons_, volume 5, pages, 561, 664 and 698; also in the _Millennial
Star_, volume 10, page 115.

We repeat that Brigham Young received all the keys, powers, authority
and priesthood, that were held by Joseph Smith, that enabled him to
preside over the high priesthood, from the Prophet Joseph Smith in
Nauvoo in the winter of 1843-4.

This important question was settled long ago by the entire body of the
Saints who accepted the leadership of the twelve, after the departure
of the Prophet and Patriarch, and sustained President Young in his
office. It was settled by the approval of the Almighty of the marvelous
work he accomplished, and which could not have been done without divine
aid and guidance. To ascribe the mighty deeds Brigham Young performed
through the power of the divine Spirit which rested upon him, to the
spirit that is the originator of secession, rebellion, apostasy, and
falsehood, is to come dangerously near blasphemy. What is it but a
repetition of the sin of the adversaries of our Lord, who, although
they knew that "no man can do the miracles that Thou doest, except
God be with him (_John, 3: 2_); yet proclaimed to the people: "He
hath an unclean spirit." (_Mark 3: 30_.) What is it but to assail the
disciple with a weapon that was in vain directed against the Master?
There was some excuse for difference of opinion on the subject of
succession, immediately after the martyrdom, because the people were
not in possession of full information, but there is no excuse now. To
use a familiar illustration: At the time of an election citizens are
expected to have different opinions as to candidates for office; they
are expected to work for those whose views and principles they support.
But when the question is settled at the polls, loyalty demands that all
accept the verdict and work together for the common interests of the
community. The body of the Latter-day Saints having accepted, as guided
by the Holy Spirit, the leadership of the twelve, there was no longer
any valid reason for seeking the leadership of other shepherds.

The trouble with some of our reorganized brethren is that they look
upon the members of the Church as a flock of sheep, that, like
other property, can be inherited. This is entirely contrary to the
fundamental principles of the Gospel. The Church belongs to Christ. The
leaders and officers are the servants of the Lord and the people of
the Lord. It follows {463} that the Lord raises up whoever He pleases,
to perform the services necessary from time to time. Brigham Young
was every way equipped for the peculiar work needed during his time.
Who could have done what he did? Sidney Rigdon? Lyman Wight? James
J. Strang? Or the founders of the so-called reorganized church? Let
the reader reflect on the facts history records, and then decide for
himself, remembering that every tree is known by its fruit.

    "_Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to
    be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God, A man
    filled with the love of God is not content with blessing his family
    alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the
    whole human race_."

    --_Joseph Smith_.

    "_If children have sinned against their parents, or husbands
    against their wives, or wives against their husbands, let them
    confess their faults one to another and forgive each other, and
    there let the confession stop, and then let them ask pardon from
    their God. Confess your sins to whoever you have sinned against,
    and let it stop there_."

    --_Brigham Young_.

{464}



THE GOSPEL PIONEER.

BY WM. JEFFERIES, AN ELDER OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY
SAINTS.

  FAITH.

  Faith is the key to knowledge rare,
  God's choice and priceless gift to man;
  It is obtained by humble prayer
  And practice of the gospel plan.
  It opes the door to secrets deep--
  Communes with God in nature's sleep.
  Prevails with God, till mortal man
  The glory of the Lord can scan.

A thorough knowledge of the first principles is absolutely essential to
the acquirement of a complete understanding of any art or science. For
example: How can the student of arithmetic extract the cube root of any
given number, or find the fifth power of another, without a knowledge
of the first or key principles of the science of numbers? Now, if this
is true of the arts and sciences, which, in the abstract, do not tend,
directly, to save a person in the presence of God, how much more is it
true in regard to the great science of theology, which must be well
understood and faithfully practiced, to a given extent, in order to
become a joint-heir with Jesus to the glory of the Father? And what
science more important than this great science of all sciences? None.
And a knowledge of its first principles ranks higher in importance to
mortals than any other knowledge attainable by Adam's fallen race;
for a knowledge of them, and honest obedience to them, together with
subsequent faithfulness, will secure a person a knowledge of the Father
and the Son, whom to know is life eternal--the greatest gift of God to
man. Hence the great importance of a thorough knowledge of the first
principles of the great science of salvation, which I will now make a
feeble attempt to briefly explain.

The first initiatory principle of the glorious plan of salvation
{465} is faith. The Apostle Paul thus defines this principle: "Now
faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen." (_Heb. xi, 1_.) Modern inspiration defines it thus: "Faith
is the assurance which men have of the existence of things which
they have not seen, and the principle of action in all intelligent
beings." (_Doc. & Cov. Lec. I, Sec. i., 9_.) And the substance of these
quotations--between which there is no conflict--I understand to be
this: Faith is the assurance which men have of the existence of things
not seen by them in the past, of the existence of things unseen by them
at present, of the existence of things to be seen or unseen by them in
the future, and the great first cause, or moving principle of action,
and consequently, of power, in all intelligent beings, whether they
are mortal or immortal. Now do not be startled, kind reader, at this
explanation. The great apostle to the Gentiles says. "Through faith
we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God." (_Heb.
xi, 3_.) This is plain. Who framed the world? God, of course; and Paul
says He did it through faith; therefore, the assertion is correct, that
faith is the principle of action and power in all intelligent beings
whether they are mortal or immortal.

Faith is produced by evidence. This is true of a false faith as
well as of a true faith. A false faith is the product of untrue or
incorrect evidence, and a true faith is produced by truthful evidence;
and, though there may be instances in which true evidence may fail
to produce faith in the skeptical and unbelieving; and wherein false
evidence may fail to create faith even in the over-credulous; yet when
faith, be it true or false, is created, I reassert that it is produced
by true or untrue evidence. In the attempt to inspire faith in these
propositions, I will summon a few of the ancient worthies, who, like
Abel, though dead, speak to us in their inspired testaments, giving us
evidence which should be faith-creating.

When the Son of God tabernacled in the flesh, He went about doing good,
healing the sick, cleansing the lepers, raising the dead, and doing
many mighty works in fulfillment of the mission He was sent on by His
Father; and while doing these things He was scoffed at, spit upon,
reviled, and persecuted, and finally crucified on Calvary--suspended
between Heaven and earth as though fit for neither. Bible-believers
need no evidence adduced here to prove this, for the facts stated are
plain and prominent in the New Testament scriptures, and are well known
to them, no doubt.

On the day after the crucifixion, the Chief Priests and Pharisees felt
somewhat troubled and anxious, and "came {466} together unto Pilate,
saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet
alive, after three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the
sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by
night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, he is risen from
the dead: so that the last error shall be worst than the first. Pilate
said unto them, ye have a watch: go your way, make it as sure as you
can. So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and
setting a watch." (_Matt. xxvii, 62-66_.)

How vain the schemes and operations of frail man! A few more hours
pass away. The angel of the Lord came down from heaven, filled with
the power of God, and armed with the keys of the resurrection. The
watch which had been set, or the keepers, "became as dead men." The
resurrection power of God was exercised. The lifeless, mangled body
of the lowly Nazarene was celestialized. The active spirit, which had
been on an important mission to the Antediluvians, entered its immortal
house, and the triumphant Jesus came forth from the silent tomb, the
first fruits of the resurrection, and the glorious conqueror of death,
hell and the grave.

As soon as some of the watch had recovered sufficiently, they "came
unto the city, and shewed unto the Chief Priests all the things that
were done. And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken
counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, saying, say ye, His
disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept. And if this
come to the governor's ears, we will persuade him, and secure you."
So they took the money, and did as they were taught; and this saying
is commonly reported among the Jews until this day. (_Matt. xxviii,
11-15_.) And, according to the generally accepted chronology, Matthew
wrote this account about five years after the events occurred.

Here prejudice, dishonesty and opposition to the purposes of Jehovah,
prompted bribery, and bribery being assured protection from the human
penalty for such a crime, published to the world a lie--a lie, too,
respecting the most important event that had ever transpired upon this
earth, as effecting the redemption of the fallen race of our great
progenitor, Adam. Matthew says: "And this saying is commonly reported
among the Jews until this day;" and I may add, to this day, too, for
the Jews not only rejected the Messiah and put him to death, and
subsequently believed the story of bribed and perjured Roman soldiers,
but they still "deny the accomplishment of the prophecies in the person
of Christ; alleging that the Messiah is not yet come;" and this also
effects their belief in the first {467} resurrection, which is past,
although, according to the thirteenth article of their creed, they
believe there will be a "resurrection of the dead when God shall see
fit."

This false evidence, given to the Jewish nation, produced in that tribe
of Israel a false faith, which exists to-day, and which will continue
to exist to a great extent among them, with all its dire consequences,
till He shall come in power and glory and "stand upon the mount of
Olives;" (_Zech. xiv, 4_.) and they shall "look upon" Him whom their
fore-fathers "pierced;" (_Zech. xii, 10_.) and the inquiry shall be
made: "What are those wounds in thine hands?" And he shall inform them
that those were the wounds "with which he was wounded in the house of
His friends." (_Zech. xiii, 6_.)

In view of these things how necessary it is that tradition should be
truth. In the beginning the Lord said: "In the day thou eatest thereof
thou shalt surely die;" and the serpent said: "Ye shall not surely
die;" and both declarations went to posterity, some believing one and
some the other. At the resurrection of the Son of God, the soldiers
said: "His disciples stole him while we slept," and many believed them.
Others said: "He rose again and ascended to His Father," and a few
believed this testimony; and I will now introduce an illustration of
this true evidence and true faith.

The Son of God had risen from the tomb. The first to discover this was
several women, and the first evidence of the fact to them was, "they
found not the body" in the sepulcher. The next was the testimony of
"two angels in shining garments." Said they: "Why seek ye the living
among the dead? He is not here, but is risen," and they quoted the
Savior's prediction of Himself, that He should be crucified, and on the
third day He should rise again, which the women remembered. These women
reported to the eleven apostles, who could hardly believe the report,
but Peter visited the sepulcher, and found that the body of Jesus was
not there. Jesus showed Himself to some on the way to Emmaus, after
which, and on the same day, He appeared to the eleven apostles, who
were somewhat terrified, and He said unto them: "Why are ye troubled?
And why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet,
that it is I myself, handle me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones, as ye see me have." He further said: "Have ye here any meat?
And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And
he took it and did eat before them." He also referred them to His own
words, to the words of Moses and the prophets, which were fulfilled
in His crucifixion and resurrection, {468} and said He, "Ye are all
witnesses of these things." He then instructed them to tarry at
Jerusalem till they were endued with power from on high, lifted up His
hands and blessed them, and ascended into heaven. (_Luke xxiv_.)

Here was an accumulation of evidence that Jesus was resurrected from
the dead. He was with the apostles more or less for forty days after
His resurrection. (_Acts i, 3_.) They _knew_ most unmistakably that
Jesus had been resurrected. The evidences were accumulative. They knew
also by the revelations of God. They were prepared to testify. The
day of Pentecost arrived. The Holy Ghost descended upon them in great
power--it filled them; and they stood forth boldly, as the champions of
the risen Jesus, as His friends and true representatives, and as men of
God, filled with truth and the revelations and power of God, to give
the lie to a bribed and perjured soldiery, and all their accessories,
and to proclaim the truth concerning the resurrection, the atonement,
the redemption, and the true plan of salvation for the exaltation
of the obedient of all mankind. And Peter, as the chief apostle, is
represented as testifying the most in this matter, and among other
things he said this: "This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we are all
witnesses." (_Acts ii_.)

Here were eleven men in one body, besides others, who were _all_
witnesses of the resurrection of the Savior of the world. Compare
their testimony with the testimony of scared, bribed, and perjured
guards--and what a testimony the latter was! "His disciples stole his
body while we slept!" What wondrous wisdom, consistency, and veracity,
characterized the suggestors and buyers of this infamous subterfuge!
What elevated manhood was exhibited by these valiant military cat-paws
of the ancient anti-Christians! What do men know of things which
transpire when they are fast asleep? A parallel need not be sought for
only in the history of the highly-enlightened anti-"Mormons" of the
nineteenth century.

What was the result of the inspired testimonies of these eleven
apostles--Peter standing forth boldly as their principal, and
proclaiming the truth in much power? Why, many were convinced by the
power of the Holy Ghost, and the inquiry was made by them: "Men and
brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, repent and be
baptized every one you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." Now, did any
of them show further evidence of conviction? Yes, about three thousand
souls were added to the church by baptism, on that day, and the Lord
added to the church daily such as {469} should be saved. (_Acts ii_.)
Herein was true evidence and true faith clearly illustrated, and I will
now draw an illustration from modern times.

In the year of our Lord, eighteen hundred and twenty, the Lord spoke
from the heavens to the boy, Joseph Smith, then in his fifteenth year.
After a seven years' training, and particularly during the last four
of the seven, the Lord by His angel delivered to him the sacred plates
from which was translated the Book of Mormon. Nearly three years
additional schooling was given him in the science of theology, during
which time he translated the Book of Mormon by the gift and power
of God; and, on the 6th day of April, 1830, he, by command of God,
organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Previous to
this time, he had testified more or less, of his visions and calling,
but from now till his cruel martyrdom in 1844, he boldly proclaimed
his divine mission, and taught the true gospel to the children of men.
Others associated themselves with him in this glorious testimony and
proclamation. Many believed their words, and cast their lot with the
much-persecuted people of God. This testimony and proclamation of the
elders of Israel have continued; a people have been gathered together
in the tops of the mountains, in fulfillment of the words of Isaiah
(_Chap. ii_); and of the words of Micah (_Chap. iv_); and in Utah and
other Territories; in many States of the American Union; and in many
other parts of the earth can be found much true faith, as the result of
correct evidence given by inspiration in these last days.

But while this work of presenting true evidence and inspiring true
faith has been going on, the adversary has not been idle. It has been
declared that Joseph Smith was _not_ a true prophet, but an impostor.
That the Book of Mormon was _not_ translated from plates given to
Joseph by an angel of God, but was simply a Spaulding romance. That, in
short the whole system of Mormonism is a monster humbug and imposture,
and all its adherents are either deceivers or deceived. Editors,
incited by popular clamor and prejudice, and priests, inspired by their
sable master, have befouled the filthy stream of misrepresentation, by
publishing dirty falsehoods and sending them broadcast on the earth
during the last half a century, till millions of the human family are
prejudiced and misled; and their responsibility in this matter is equal
to that of their prototypes, the ancient Scribes, priests, and elders
who framed the lie and paid their dupes to testify to it--that Jesus
was not resurrected, but that His disciples stole the body while {470}
they slept; and heaven's condemnation rests upon them for thus using
the power of press and pulpit. Hence, to-day there is a vast amount of
false faith on the earth, which has been produced by incorrect evidence
concerning some of the most important events which have transpired
preparatory to the coming of the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven in
power and great glory.

These facts, culled from ancient and modern history, I consider
sufficient to prove clearly to honest hearts and enlightened minds,
that faith is produced by evidence--a false faith by false evidence,
and a true faith by true evidence.

In the foregoing an attempt has been made to show that faith is
produced by evidence; that this is true both of a false faith and a
true one; and that the results are good or bad according as the faith
is true or false. And in doing this the principle of faith itself has
been taught more or less, but a few more remarks are necessary.

Faith in _God_ is necessary. "But without faith it is _impossible_ to
please Him: for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that
He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him." (_Heb. xi, 6_.) And
who can expect to receive salvation _from_ God, if they do not believe
_in_ Him?

Faith in Jesus Christ is necessary. "He that believeth on the Son hath
everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life:
but the wrath of God abideth on him." (_John iii, 36_.) Who can expect
the glorious benefits of the atonement, if they do not believe in the
Savior of the world, nor in the great atonement which He made for poor
fallen man?

Faith in the servants of God is necessary, also. When Jesus sent His
servants forth to preach the gospel, He said unto them: "He that
heareth you heareth me, and he that despiseth you despiseth me, and he
that despiseth me despiseth Him that sent me." (_Luke x, 16_.) "He that
receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth Him that
sent me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall
receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in
the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward."
(_Matt. x, 40, 41_.) "And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear
your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the
dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable
for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for
that city." (_Matt. x, 14, 15_.) Neither God the Father nor God the Son
travel among us now to preach and administer {471} for the benefit of
Adam's race, but they authorize mortal men to do this work; hence it is
necessary to receive them, treat them kindly, and have faith in them as
the representatives of the Father and the Son.

Faith in the plan of salvation is necessary. The principles of the
gospel must be believed in order to obtain their benefits; some of
those principles are set forth briefly in this little pamphlet; and
when these are tested and proven to be of divine origin, conferring
many glorious blessings upon those who obey them, others can be found
suitable to advanced students in the Lord's school of divinity. The
gospel is unchangeable and eternal. It is filled with blessings that
are temporal, spiritual and eternal. It is free for all. "And this
gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness
unto all nations, and then shall the end come." (_Matt. xxiv, 14_.) "I
marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the
grace of Christ, unto another gospel, which is not another, but there
be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. But
though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we
said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other gospel
unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed." (_Gal. i,
6-9_.)

Blessed are they who believe and live the fullness of the gospel of
Jesus Christ, for they shall obtain eternal life in the celestial
kingdom of God!

  REPENTANCE.

  Repentance is an evidence
  Of living, saving faith in God.
  The sinner manifesting sense
  In turning from the path he trod--
  Not a sentimental sorrow,
  Felt to-day and gone to-morrow;
  But--by God's help I will do right,
  And shun all wrong with all my might.

Repentance is the second principle of the gospel of the Son of God. And
here it would be well, perhaps, to dispose of an objection which some
may raise in regard to this being the second principle of the gospel.
There are religionists who hold and teach that repentance precedes
faith, and this error I will briefly refer to and correct.

In the first place, let the test of reason be applied. If a man does
not believe in the existence of a God; nor in the {472} existence of
the laws of God; nor in the penalties for violating those laws; nor in
his own existence after what is believed by him to be the death of both
body and spirit; nor consequently, if he does not believe in either the
power or opportunity to punish him for what some people may call sin,
but which he does not believe is a sin against anybody or anything;
will he be likely to be sorry for anything he has done? Will he reform
through hope of reward or fear of punishment, or both combined? Will
such a man repent of his sins? Every reasonable man, who studies this
principle, will answer with an emphatic, No!

But if a man is taught that there is a God; that He has revealed laws
for the government of the actions of His earthly children; that those
laws embody rewards for obedience and punishments for disobedience;
that there is an existence after death has separated body and spirit;
that none can escape the results of their acts, that all will be
judged, and then rewarded or punished, according to the deeds done
in the body; and if he believes these teachings, _then_ he will be
likely to cease to do evil and learn to do well--he will repent of his
sins, and strive to serve his God faithfully. But if, after he _has_
been taught as before stated, he should fail to believe, _then_ he
will _not_ repent, for he is not prompted by that living faith which
produces sincere repentance. And this conclusion is legitimate and
clear, no doubt, to the unbeclouded and unprejudiced mind of every
intelligent and reasonable man.

But the testimony of inspiration as well as reason shall be given in
this matter, and this should be conclusive. After the crucifixion of
the Savior, Peter became president of the church. To him were given the
keys of the kingdom, and he, certainly, understood the order of the
principles of the gospel, just as well as an arithmetician understands
the order of the first principles of arithmetic. And what position
did he give repentance? Did he make it precede faith? On the day of
Pentecost Peter preached to the assembled multitude. He taught the word
of God; he quoted the Old Testament scriptures; he showed that some
of them were fulfilled; he testified that Jesus was the Christ; he
declared that they had crucified the Son of God; he taught the glorious
principle of the resurrection; said he: "This Jesus hath God raised up,
whereof we are _all witnesses_." and he told them "that God hath made
that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ." This
testimony of Peter, which was accompanied by the convincing power of
the Holy Ghost, inspired them with faith in what he taught and prompted
the question: "Men and brethren, {473} what shall we do?" Said Peter,
in reply: "Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost." They _had_ faith. The preaching had created it.
Peter knew this. And he _then_ taught them the second, third and fourth
principles of the gospel in their order, viz.: Repentance, remission of
sins, and the reception of the Holy Ghost, thus establishing the order
of those principles beyond all cavil or controversy, and for all time,
for the benefit of Bible-believers in all their generations throughout
the earth.

Repentance, then, is the second principle of the great gospel plan
of salvation, as taught by Jesus Christ and His apostles. And what
is repentance? Is it merely sorrow for sin? No. Sorrow is a part of
it, but it must be the right kind of sorrow. There is a sorrow which
leadeth unto death, and a sorrow which produces true repentance. Read
the testimony of the apostle Paul on this point: "For a godly sorrow
worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow
of the world worketh death." (_II Cor. vii, 10_.)

Real sorrow for sin produces true repentance, and a genuine repentance
is a forsaking of sin, coupled with a burning desire and a strong
determination to keep the commandments of God, which will be shown
in reformation of life and conduct, in a prayerful spirit, and a
reliance upon God for strength to overcome in every hour of trial and
temptation. Isaiah taught repentance in these words: "Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him
return unto the Lord, and He will have mercy upon him; and to our God
for He will abundantly pardon." (_Isa. lv, 7_.)

The scriptures contain much evidence showing what true repentance is,
and what its fruits are; and they present us with evidence concerning
the repentance which is not genuine, as instance Simon the sorcerer. He
had believed Philip's preaching, and had been baptized; but Peter found
him "in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity," and called
upon him to repent of his "wickedness."

Repentance means forsaking sin. Let him that steals _steal no more_.
Let him that has done wrong in any way, do so no more, but do right
before God and man. In the language of the able Apostle, Orson Pratt,
"It would be of no use for a sinner to confess his sins to God, unless
he were determined to forsake them; it would be of no benefit to him
to feel sorry that he had done wrong, unless he intended to do wrong
no more, it would be folly for him to confess before God that he had
injured his fellow-man, unless he were determined to do {474} all
in his power to make restitution. Repentance, then, is not only a
confession of sins, with a sorrowful, contrite heart, but a fixed,
settled purpose to refrain from every evil way."

BAPTISM.

  Earth's noon arrived! The Savior came!
  And was by John of ancient fame,
  Baptized in Jordan's sacred tide,
  A righteous law to thus abide--
  Example setting to all men
  How they must all be born again:
  Born of water--people hear it!
  If God's kingdom they'd inherit.

There are several things connected with baptism which should be well
understood before the candidate yields obedience to it. The mode, the
object and the necessity of it.

First, then, the mode. Is sprinkling the correct way to baptize? Jesus
was the great exemplar. Was He sprinkled? John the Baptist baptized by
immersion. Did John baptize in the right way? Certainly he did. Would
Jesus have gone to an impostor for baptism? Would He have demanded
baptism by immersion of John, if sprinkling were the correct method?
And if immersion had been the _incorrect_ method, would the Spirit of
God have descended like a dove upon Him, and His Father have uttered
His approval in these words: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased?" I think not. John baptized a great many in the river Jordan.
He baptized Jesus there. "And Jesus, when He was baptized, went up
straightway out of the water." (_Matt. iii, 16_.) "John baptized in
Aenon near to Salim because there was much water there." (_John iii,
23_.) Philip, acting under the direction of the apostles, baptized
by immersion. In baptizing the eunuch, "They went down both into the
water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him. And when they
were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away
Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more." (_Acts, viii, 38, 39_.)
If sprinkling were all that was necessary, Paul and Silas need not
have taken the jailor and his household out of their house just after
midnight to baptize them; for they could have performed the ordinance
in the house, and a half pint of water would have been plenty for
the purpose. (_Acts, xvi_.) Paul tells the Romans, "that so many of
us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death;
_therefore we are buried with Him by baptism_ into death; that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even
{475} so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of His death, we shall be also in the
likeness of His resurrection." (_Rom. vi, 3, 4, 5_.)

Now why represent the death of the Savior, by becoming dead unto
sin? Or His burial, by being buried in water in baptism? Or His
resurrection, by being raised from the liquid grave in baptism, to walk
in newness of life?--Why all this, if sprinkling were the proper mode
of baptism? And these remarks and quotations apply to the erroneous
principle of pouring as well as to sprinkling. Does either sprinkling
or pouring represent a death, a burial, or a resurrection? Not in the
least. But immersion does, and it _is_ an actual burial in water.

Jesus said to Nicodemus: "Except a man be born of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (_John iii, 5_.)
Does sprinkling or pouring represent a birth? No! but immersion does.
Coming out of the element of water into the element of air, is a fair
representation of a birth, and the words of the Apostle, Orson Pratt,
are very appropriate here. He wrote thus upon this subject: "As the
embryo must first be immersed in water before it can receive the
quickening of the human spirit, so a man must _first_ be immersed in
water before he has the promise of the quickening or life-giving power
of the Holy Spirit. As the infant is born, or comes forth from the
watery element into a new kingdom or world of existence, so a man in
baptism comes forth from the liquid element of water into the kingdom
of God's dear Son, which is a new state of existence."

The New Testament scriptures do not furnish any authority for
administering baptism by a sprinkling or pouring; but the evidences
therein contained show most conclusively, that immersion was the
proper mode of baptism as administered to Jesus, and practiced by His
apostles--and who but God has authority to change this ordinance? And
where is the proof that He has ever changed it? It cannot be found; and
immersion stands to-day, unchanged and unchangeable, as the proper mode
of administering the gospel ordinance of baptism for the benefit of
believing and repentant candidates for salvation in the kingdom of God.

The object of baptism next claims our attention. And what is this
ordinance administered for? Is it simply "an outward sign of an inward
grace?" Baptism was instituted _for the remission of sins_. John went
"into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance
for the remission of sins." (_Luke iii, 3_.) After the crucifixion
of the Savior, He {476} appeared unto the Eleven and gave them the
mission to preach the gospel to every creature; (_Luke xvi, 15-18_.)
and on the day of Pentecost, after being filled with the Holy Ghost,
according to the promise of the Father, they commenced their great
mission. On this occasion they preached to the assembled thousands of
many nationalities, baptism _for the remission of sins_, and about
three thousand souls were baptized on that day for the special purpose
of obtaining _the remission of their sins_. The testimony of Paul
concerning himself is this: that Ananias said unto him: "Arise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins." (_Acts xxii, 16_.)

Thus it is clearly established, and that, too, by evidence which no
Bible-believer can controvert, that the ordinance of baptism was
established _for the remission of sins_.

The necessity of baptism must be understood. It is taught by some
that the observance of this ordinance is optional on the part of the
candidate for celestial glory. This is dangerous doctrine. There is
no authority for it in the scriptures, Jesus and His apostles never
taught it. It is contrary to their teachings. Jesus never included a
non-essential principle in the great plan of salvation. Had not baptism
been necessary, He would not have said to His apostles: "He that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved," (_Mark xvi, 16_). Neither
would He have said to them: "Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations,
_baptizing_ them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost." (_Luke xxviii, 19_.)

Baptism is as necessary as remission of sins. It was instituted and
placed in the great system of salvation as the ordinance of remission.
It was taught, accepted and administered as such, on the day of
Pentecost, to the joy of three thousand souls.

Paul, after the light of heaven shone upon him, and the Lord said unto
him: "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" was blind, repenting,
fasting and praying for three days; and why did not the Lord have
compassion upon the poor sinner in this deplorable condition, and
forgive him, without sending him to Ananias to have the ordinance of
baptism administered to him? Because Paul was a sinner. He needed
remission of sins. He needed the birth of the water to admit him into
the kingdom. And Jesus honored the law of remission by sending him to
one who could administer it effectually, which Jesus never would have
done if it had not been necessary for Paul's salvation. (_Acts ix_.)

It is believed by many that a good man will certainly be saved without
baptism--the Lord would not be just if he did {477} not save him,
even if he were not baptized. Now, I presume that but few men can be
found who are better, in a great many respects, than was Cornelius
of old. He was "a devout man, and one that feared God with all his
house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway."
(_Acts ix., 2_.) The Lord had so much respect for him on account of his
goodness, that He sent an angel to him, who said to him: "Thy prayers
and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God." (_Acts x, 4_.)
Certainly, he was a good man; and, according to the notions of many
religionists, such a man ought to be saved, and will be, independent
of any ordinances. But wait a little. What more did the angel say unto
him? Said he: "And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose
surname is Peter; he lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by
the sea-side, he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do." (_Acts x,
3, 4_).

What! Is it possible that a good man like Cornelius needed to do
anything more than he was doing, in order to be accepted and justified
before God? It appears that the Lord thought so; and it was of such
importance, too, that He sent an angel to tell him what his further
duty was. And what was it? Peter preached the gospel to him and his
household, after his arrival among them. The Holy Ghost fell upon them
to bear testimony to Peter's words, and as an evidence to Peter of the
favor they enjoyed with the Lord, and then "he commanded them to be
baptized in the name of the Lord." (_Acts x, 4, 8_.)

Now, suppose that Cornelius and his house had disregarded Peter's
command to be baptized, could they have been saved? No. Why? Because
the angel told him that Peter should tell him words whereby he and all
his household should be saved. (_Acts xi. 14_). It is very evident,
therefore, that baptism for the remission of sins is necessary unto
salvation.

Infant baptism, as it is erroneously termed, or infant sprinkling,
should receive a brief notice here. This is not authorized in the
scriptures, neither have any of the New Testament writers alluded to
it. Some have supposed because in a few instances whole households
were baptized, that possibly there were some infants among them. But
this supposition is a very weak foundation upon which to establish an
important principle of salvation. In the households of Lydia, Cornelius
and the jailor, there were no infants--at least, we cannot learn that
there were from the history given of them in the Acts of the Apostles.
In fact, the evidence is to the contrary. In the case of the jailor,
Paul and Silas _taught_ him, and _all_ that were in his house, the word
of the Lord. (_Acts xvi, 32_.) In the {478} household of Cornelius,
the Holy Ghost fell upon them which heard the words of Peter, and
they _spoke_ with tongues and _magnified_ God. (_Acts x_.) And in the
household of Lydia it is evident there were no infants any more than
there were in the other two households, for these reasons: The gospel
is to be _preached_ to individuals. What is the use to _preach_ to
infants? They cannot understand it; they cannot have faith in it; they
cannot repent, for they have not sinned; it is no use to baptize them,
for there are no sins to remit. Sin is a transgression of the law.
They have not transgressed any law, therefore, they are without sin.
And even had infants any sins to remit, they could not be remitted by
baptism alone, for faith and repentance must be exercised in connection
with baptism, but infants cannot exercise either. Therefore, it is
unreasonable to suppose that the apostles would attempt to teach
or baptize infants in the households referred to, or in any other
households--they knew better than to act so foolishly in the sight of
God.

There are others who have supposed that the baptism of infants is
in the place of circumcision. But this is merely a conjecture of
impostors to deceive the ignorant. The scriptures do not substitute
infant baptism for circumcision. There is no connection or similarity
between the two principles. They are no more alike than truth and
error, or darkness and light, or heaven and hell. Circumcision is an
ancient ceremony or operation performed exclusively on male infants
at eight days old; but baptism is an immersion in water, of both male
and female, when they have reached an age to be capable of sinning,
believing the gospel when it is taught them, and repenting of their
sins, so that they may have their past sins remitted according
to the laws of God. These evidences should be conclusive to all
Bible-believers.

LAYING ON OF HANDS FOR IMPARTING THE HOLY GHOST

  True faith in God, repentance true,
  Sins remitted by immersion;
  The humble soul is born anew,
  And the spirit takes possession.
  By laying on of holy hands,
  Of God's own servants here on earth;
  Those who've obeyed the Lord's commands,
  Will realize the Spirit's birth.

After the candidate for eternal life has been baptized for the
remission of his sins, and has sought unto the Lord in faith, honestly
repenting of his sins, and has obtained the forgiveness {479} of all
his past transgressions, he is entitled to the gift of the Holy Ghost.
He should seek for it, for the Lord has promised that he shall receive
it, but He has established a certain ordinance through which He bestows
this precious gift. That ordinance is the "Laying on of hands." Many
may question this, but the scriptures should decide the matter. Let
us see how Paul received the Holy Ghost. Ananias received a mission
to visit Paul, and entered into the house where he was staying, "and
_putting his hands on him_ said: Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus,
that appeared unto thee in the way as thou earnest, hath sent me, that
thou mightest receive thy sight, and be _filled with the Holy Ghost_."
(_Acts ix. 17_.) But why not fill him with the Holy Ghost without
any administration of Ananias, seeing that he had faith, and was
repenting and fasting and praying before the Lord? Because the Lord had
established an order in the plan of salvation. He had authorized His
servants to observe that order in ministering the spirit as well as the
water, and they were to minister the spirit by the _laying on of hands_.

How did Paul administer the spirit? It is possible that he obtained his
first lesson, in the administration of baptism and the laying on of
hands, from Ananias when he himself was baptized and confirmed; but,
whether this was his first lesson or not, he, no doubt, learned to
administer the ordinances of the gospel correctly. And when he came to
Ephesus and found about twelve men who had been baptized "unto John's
baptism," "they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus," "and when
Paul _laid his hands upon them_, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they
spake with tongues, and prophesied." (_Acts xix. 1-6_.) Thus, we see
Paul administered the Holy Ghost by "the laying on of hands."

When Philip preached to the Samaritans, they believed and were baptized
both men and women. "Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem
heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them
Peter and John, who when they were come down, prayed for them that they
might receive the Holy Ghost; (for as yet he was fallen upon none of
them, only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus). Then laid
they their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. (_Acts
viii, 14-17_.)

Now, as they were apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, faithful men
whose prayers God would hear and answer, why did not the Lord bestow
upon those Samaritans the gift of the Holy Ghost in answer to the
earnest prayers of His faithful servants, without the ordinance of the
laying on of hands? {480} Because that would have been contrary to the
law laid down for the ministering of the spirit. Peter and John were
anxious that the Lord should bless their administration for the benefit
of those baptized believers. They desired that the Holy Ghost should
rest down upon them in mighty power. But they could not exercise the
authority of the apostleship in and of themselves, and independently
of the Lord, hence they prayed for themselves, no doubt, and that the
Samaritans "might receive the Holy Ghost." _Then_ they performed the
proper ordinance, God honored the administration in answer to their
prayer, and those baptized believers "received the Holy Ghost." (_Acts
viii, 17_).

The laying on of hands, then, is the Lord's ordinance for imparting the
Holy Ghost to His believing, repentant, and baptized children, and He
has never made it void, or authorized any man to change it, or to teach
the inhabitants of the earth that it is done away and no longer needed.

AUTHORITY TO PREACH AND ADMINISTER.

  God's Priesthood once dwelt here on earth,
  And gave to men their gospel birth;
  Many who held it martyrs fell;
  On earth in peace it could not dwell.
  But thanks to God He has again,
  Bestowed His Priesthood upon men;
  And His decree has now gone forth--
  It shall henceforth remain on earth!

The authority to preach the gospel and administer its ordinances,
is a very important matter to be considered in connection with the
first principles of the gospel. If those ordinances are administered
by divine authority, the blessings of God will attend those
administrations; but if they are not, it is unreasonable to expect the
Lord will bestow such blessings; hence, it is well to ascertain who is
in the possession of the authority of God, to act in the name of His
son Jesus Christ, as ministers of salvation and eternal life to the
children of men here on the earth.

A man, to be a servant of God, must be called, authorized, and
empowered by the Lord in some way, or how can he be a servant of God?
Man does not recognize any other man as his servant unless he has
appointed and authorized him in some way, neither does the Lord.

Jesus was sent by His Father. (_John v. 23-24, vi. 38-40, xvii, 21_.)
The first officers in the Church of Christ are apostles. (_Eph. iv,
11_.) Jesus was an apostle. (_Heb. iii, v_.) He {481} called other
apostles. Said He to His apostles, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit."
(_John xv, 16_.) Jesus being sent of God, and being an apostle, he had
a right under the authority of His Father, to call and ordain other
apostles, and this is the way the apostles obtained the authority of
God, to act in the name of Jesus Christ, for the benefit of the human
family. Under the direction of the Father and His Son Jesus Christ
they had authority to call and ordain others; but without similar
authority no man has a right to call and ordain others, or officiate
in any of the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ. "No man taketh
this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron."
(_Heb. v, 4_.) And how was Aaron called? The Lord told Moses to take
him to assist in performing a certain work. (_Exod. iv, 14-16_.) And
no man _taketh_ the honor _unto himself_, for he must be called by the
voice of God through a prophet as Aaron was; or by Jesus Christ as His
apostles were, or by an angel of God, as in the case of the calling
of Gideon to deliver Israel from the Midianites, (_Judges vi_); or by
the Holy Ghost, as were Barnabas and Saul, (_Acts xiii, 2_); or by the
direction of the Almighty, through the spirit of inspiration, operating
in some legitimate channel.

A man must be called, ordained, authorized and empowered from on
high, or he is not a servant of God. And the calling, ordaining, or
authorizing, of one man, does not call, ordain, or authorize another.
It takes new revelation in each case. God must designate, in some
way, the man for His service. A man must go forth with authority to
preach, to call to repentance, to baptize for the remission of sins, to
impart the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; and if sins are not
remitted, and the Holy Ghost is not imparted, when the conditions are
faithfully observed, then the administrator is an impostor, or he is
not authorized to preach the fullness of the gospel to the children of
men. A man who is commissioned of Jesus Christ to proclaim the fullness
of the gospel, and officiate in its ordinances for the benefit of our
race, will promise remission of sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost,
in the name of Jesus Christ, and his promise never fails when the
conditions are faithfully observed; but an impostor dare not make any
such a promise to the sons of men. He has no authority from God to do
so, and if he did make any such promise, he knows that God would not
honor it and fulfill it, for He did not authorize him to make it.

Therefore, ye sons and daughters of men, be careful on this {482}
question of authority. Try to learn where the true authority exists.
Be assured that the administrations of a person unauthorized of
God will be of no benefit to you in time nor in eternity; but the
administrations of a man who is sent of God by new revelation, will
bless you in this life, and you will realize it; and they will lay the
foundation for blessings, glory, honor, power and exaltation, in the
celestial worlds for ever and ever.

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

The first or initiatory principles of the gospel, as herein set forth,
are but very briefly alluded to the treatment of them herein was not
designed to be exhaustive. The object was merely to give a few hints,
and by so doing cause curiosity and interest and faith to spring up,
and prompt honest research and prayerful investigation, which would
lead to humble obedience to the laws of God.

The writer did not prepare this because he had anything new or original
to offer. Every man who is warned must warn his neighbor. This is the
word of God. My testimony must be heard. I am not justified before the
Lord if it is not. I must try to clear my garments of the blood of this
generation; hence this little work.

I bear my humble testimony that God has spoken from the heavens in
these last days. The true gospel of salvation is being taught to
the children of men by the Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. They taught that gospel to me. I believed it with
all my heart. I embraced it with a sincere and honest purpose to do the
will of God on the earth. My sins were forgiven through the ordinance
of baptism. The Holy Ghost was sent down from heaven and rested
mightily upon me through the laying on of the hands of the servants of
God. By that spirit I was taught of God, and I learned by revelation
through its agency that God lived, that He had spoken from the heavens,
and that He had raised up a mighty prophet in the person of Joseph
Smith. I knew that the work he had established through that prophet's
instrumentality was true, and that nothing could overthrow it. The
holy Priesthood was conferred upon me. I preached to others, and
officiated in the ordinances of the gospel for their benefit. They also
received the remission of sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost through
my administrations, and rejoiced in the Lord. And I know that all who
will yield humble obedience to the principles of the gospel, as taught
by the Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, will
receive {483} the remission of sins and the testimony of Jesus through
the gift of the Holy Ghost; and by this spirit they shall know of the
truth of the doctrines they have obeyed. They shall know that the
faithful Elders of Israel are clothed with the authority of Almighty
God, and they shall bear testimony of these things to the children of
men.

I bear my humble testimony of these things. God lives. His gospel
and authority and plan of salvation are restored to the earth by the
administration of holy angels. The heavens are open. Man communes
with his God. The Millennium dawn is near. The Son of God will soon
come in clouds of heaven in power and great glory. He will reward the
righteous, and take vengeance on the wicked, as saith the scriptures.
Blessed are they who hear the warning voice of the good shepherds of
Israel, for they shall escape the judgments the Lord is about to pour
out upon the ungodly; they shall have joy unspeakable in this life; and
in the life to come they shall enjoy the blessings of immortality in
the presence of the Father and the Son in the celestial worlds.

    "_Be virtuous and pure; be men of integrity and truth; keep the
    commandments of God, then you will be able more perfectly to
    understand the difference between right and wrong--between the
    things of God and the things of men; and your path will be like
    that of the just, which shineth brighter and brighter unto the
    perfect day_."

    --_Joseph Smith, The Prophet_.

{484}



GLAD TIDINGS OF GREAT JOY.

GEORGE TEASDALE.

    "Wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead."
    --_James ii. 20_.

We take this means of visiting you, at your hearths and homes, to
testify to you of the restoration of the Everlasting Gospel and the
Holy Priesthood, by the visitation of an holy angel in fulfilment of
the predictions of the prophets; to usher in the dispensation of the
fullness of times and the establishment of the kingdom of God.

The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation. (_Rom. i, 16, 17_). "And
being made perfect He (Christ) became the author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him," (_Heb. v. 9_). Its first principles are,
faith, repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost.

FAITH IN GOD.

    "But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that
    cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder
    of them that diligently seek him" (_Heb. xi. 6_). "He that heareth
    my word, and believed on Him that sent me, hath everlasting life"
    (_John v. 24_). "For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach,
    because we trust in the living God" (_I. Tim. iv. 10_).

FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST.

    "And this is His commandment; that we should believe on the name of
    his son Jesus Christ" (_John iii. 23_). And this is life eternal,
    that they might know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
    thou has sent" (_John xvii. 3_). "Jesus said unto her, I am the
    resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were
    dead, yet shall he live" (_John ix. 25_). "For the wages of sin is
    death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ
    our Lord" (_Rom. vi. 23_). "For there is none other name under
    heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (_Acts iv. 12_).

REPENTANCE.

    "Repent and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so
    iniquity shall not be your ruin" (_Ezekiel xviii. 30_). "And they
    went out and preached that men should repent" (_Mark vi. 12_).
    Jesus Christ preached, "repent ye and believe the gospel" (_Mark i.
    15_).

{485}

BAPTISM.

    "Ye must be born again (_John iii. 7_). "Verily, verily, I say unto
    thee, except a man be born of water, and of the spirit he cannot
    enter into the kingdom of God" (_John iii. 5_). "Go ye into all the
    world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth
    and is baptized shall be saved" (_Mark xvi. 15, 16_). Peter said
    unto them, "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of
    Jesus Christ for the remission of sins" (_Acts ii. 38_). "And now
    why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins,
    calling on the name of the Lord" (_Acts xxii. 16_). "Therefore we
    are buried with Him by baptism" (Rom. vi. 4). "Buried with him in
    baptism" (_Col. ii. 12_). "The like figure whereunto even baptism
    doth now save us" (_I Peter iii. 21_). "One Lord, one faith, one
    baptism" (_Eph. iv. 5_).

THE HOLY GHOST.

    "And ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (_Acts ii. 38_).
    "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
    send in my name, he will teach you all things" (_John xiv. 26_).
    "Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
    Ghost. And when Simon saw that when through laying on of the
    Apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given" (_Acts viii. 17, 18_).
    "And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on
    them" (_Acts xix. 6_). "Therefore, leaving the principles of the
    doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again
    the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith towards
    God. Of the doctrine of baptism, and of laying on of hands" (_Heb.
    vi. 2_).

ORGANIZATION.

    "Now therefore ye (the Saints) are no more strangers and
    foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the
    household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles
    and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone"
    (_Eph. ii. 20_).

    "And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some,
    evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of
    the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
    body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of
    the knowledge of the Son of God" (_Eph. iv. 11-13_).

    "Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God
    hath set some in the Church, first apostles, secondarily prophets,
    thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings,
    helps, governments, diversities of tongues" (_I Cor. xii. 27, 28_).

    "And no man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called
    God, as was Aaron: so also Christ glorified not Himself to be an
    high priest; but he that said unto Him, Thou art my Son, to-day
    have I begotten thee" (_Heb. v. 4, 5_).

    "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling,
    consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ
    Jesus" (_Heb. iii. 1_).

WE BELIEVE IN CONTINUOUS REVELATIONS FROM GOD.

    "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally" (_James i. 5, 6_). No man knoweth the Father but by
    {486} revelation from the Son (_Luke x. 22_). "Where there is no
    vision, the people perish" (_Prov. xxix. 18_). "Surely the Lord
    will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the
    prophets" (_Amos iii. 7_).

    We believe it is essential to salvation to

OBEY THE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST.

    "Being made perfect, He became the author of eternal salvation unto
    all them that obey Him" (_Heb. v. ix_).

    "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices
    as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than
    sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as
    the sin of witchcraft and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry"
    (_I Sam. xv. 22_).

    "And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
    shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming
    fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
    the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with
    everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
    glory of His power" (_II Thess. i. 7-9_).

    "If we walk in the light as He (God) is in the light, we have
    fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
    cleanseth us from all sin" (_I John i. 7_).

    "And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even
    as he is pure" (_I John iii. 3_).

    "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly,
    nor standeth in the way of the sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of
    the scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord: and in His
    law doth he meditate day and night" (_Psalm i. 1, 2_).

When John, the Revelator, was upon the Isle of Patmos the Lord revealed
the principal events that were to happen upon this earth before His
second coming. It was "The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave
to him, to show unto His servants things which must shortly come to
pass; and He sent and signified it by His angel unto His servant John"
(Rev. i. 1). After showing him the apostasy of the primitive church,
and the rise of false systems (_Rev xxii. and xxiii_.) and the fear of
God being taught by the precepts of men, as foretold by Isaiah (xxix.
13, 14), he showed him the restoration of the gospel. He said, "and I
saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting
gospel to preach to them that dwell upon the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice,
Fear, God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come:
and worship Him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the
fountains of water."

Daniel declared that "in the last days, the God of heaven would set
up a kingdom that should never be destroyed" {487} (_Dan. ii. 44_).
Isaiah (ii. 2, 3) and Micah (iv. 1, 2) have both declared that in the
last days, the mountain of the Lord's house should be established
in the tops of the mountains, and many should say, let us go up to
the house of the God of Jacob, that they might learn of His ways and
walk in His paths. It is the testimony of the thousands of Latter-day
Saints, gathered to the mountains, that God has restored to the earth
the everlasting gospel; that angels have visited the earth, restoring
the Holy Priesthood; that Joseph Smith the Prophet-martyr of the
nineteenth century, was the man honored of God, with others, to usher
in the dispensation of the fullness of times and the restitution of all
things, in fulfillment of the prophets.

The Church of Christ was again established upon the earth on the 6th
day of April, 1830; and, from that day to the present, has steadily
increased, notwithstanding the prejudice, caused by misrepresentation
and the "refuge of lies," brought to bear against it, and the
persecution it has gone through. It has been guided to the tops of the
mountains, and is being established in power, gathering the seed of
Israel from all nations where they have been scattered, teaching them
"the ways of the Lord," preparing them for the second coming of Christ,
and offering a home for the oppressed of all nations.

All mankind are required to repent, to "seek the Lord while He may
be found," to be baptized for the remission of their sins, that they
may receive the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, in God's appointed way, by
the laying on of hands; that they may know these things are true for
themselves, by the revelations of God, and gain a living testimony.
"If any man will do His will (that of the Father) he shall know of the
doctrine" (_John vii. 17_), and no more be carried about by "every wind
of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive" (_Eph. iv. 14_).

Then flee to Zion for safety; as it is written "come out of her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not
of her plagues" (_Rev. xviii. 4, 5_), "For wheresoever the carcass is,
there will the eagles be gathered together" (Matt. xxiv. 28).

Your kind, prayerful consideration of these truths is earnestly
invited. Search the scriptures; surely the signs of the times proclaim
the second coming of our Lord and Savior to be right at hand, but who
shall stand when he appeareth?

{488}



SUGGESTIONS TO ELDERS.

BY ELDER B. H. ROBERTS, IN MILLENNIAL STAR, 1888.

In the concluding paragraphs of a revelation on the subject of
priesthood, the Lord says:

"Now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which
he is appointed, in all diligence. He that is slothful shall not be
counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows
himself not approved, shall not be counted worthy to stand." (Doc. and
Cov., sec. cvii. 99, 100.)

We have no doubt but there is a general desire among the brethren
of the priesthood to know their duty and then do it; especially is
this the case with the Elders who have been sent to these lands to
preach the Gospel. The duties and labors of these brethren are varied,
consisting not only of preaching the Gospel, but also administering in
all the ordinances and ceremonies pertaining to it. They are required
at times to baptize people for the remission of their sins, and to
confirm the members of the Church and bestow upon them the Holy Ghost
by the laying on of hands. At other times they are called upon to
anoint the sick with oil, or to confirm the anointing performed by
others, and rebuke the sickness or disease, and bless with life and
health those who are afflicted. Then they are called upon to administer
the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and all these things should be done
decently, intelligently, and in order that no reproach or derision may
be thrown upon the work of God by reason of their awkwardness in any of
these things.

Nor is the derision from strangers, who may witness any bungling
administration in these ceremonies, the worst evil feared. But any
blundering on the part of those who administer is very apt to have an
evil effect upon the mind of those receiving the administration, and
sometimes the adversary takes advantage of these things and creates
doubts or suspicions in those receiving the ordinance as to the
validity or power of the administration. We are acquainted with several
{489} circumstances where the most disastrous results have grown out of
this very thing. Too much care cannot be exercised in these matters.

So far as the ceremony connected with baptism is concerned, the words
to be used are given in the Scriptures (see Book of Mormon, III Nephi
xi, 24-26, Doc. and Cov., sec. xx, 72-74); so also in blessing the
sacrament; but in the matter of confirming people members of the
Church and bestowing upon them the Holy Ghost, anointing or blessing
the sick, naming and blessing children, or even of ordaining men to
the priesthood and assigning to them their position or office in that
priesthood, we know of no formula that is given in the Scriptures. The
matter seems to be left to the good taste and judgment of those who
administer, without binding them to any set forms. On the whole, we
rather like the idea of these things being so left, since we can see
it gives more liberty for the operations of the spirit of God; that
is, the mind of the administrator being free from stereotyped forms,
he is at liberty to pronounce whatever the Spirit of the Lord may put
into his heart to say. And where the Elder has learned his duty and has
given these matters careful consideration, a beautiful and powerful
administration is usually the result.

But, unfortunately, it sometimes happens the Elders who have never
learned well their duty nor considered these things carefully, are
called upon to administer; and neither judgment nor good taste is
liable to dictate what they should say; and much evil may result from
their not knowing how to perform properly these duties.

For the benefit of the young and inexperienced Elders, and for the
older ones, too, who may have been careless hitherto in respect to
these matters, we offer the following suggestions:

While the form of words are for any ordinance, as in baptism and the
administration of the sacrament, it should be carefully learned by the
Elders, that they may be always ready when called upon to officiate.
And where no formula is given, then the objects to be accomplished by
the ordinance should be noted, and such a form of words fixed in the
mind as will in the most direct and simple manner attain those objects.
We say direct and simple because these are qualities, excellencies,
we may say, which enter into all the administrations in the Gospel.
They are characteristics of the whole plan of salvation. In proof of
this we ask what could be more simple or direct, than the ceremony
said at baptism: "Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize
you in the name of {490} Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen." There is not a superfluous word in it, nor is anything omitted
necessary to be said. So with the prayer that is given to be said in
blessing the bread and water to be used in the sacrament. So, too,
these characteristics of directness and simplicity are found in the
great model prayer taught by the Savior to His disciples, and to
our own mind this beautiful simplicity and directness of everything
associated with the Gospel is part of its divinity, and one of the
greatest evidences that it emanated from God, who sustains and governs
the great universe by the simplest means. In those ordinances, then,
where the form of words to be used is left for the administrator to
choose, we would say let such a choice be made as will keep those
administrations in harmony with the whole spirit of the Gospel--let
simplicity mark their outline; and let such words be employed as will
at once accomplish the object of the ordinance. To illustrate: In
confirming a person a member of the Church, the Elder, calling the
person by name, as he should do, and then in the name of the Messiah,
sometimes says: "We lay our hands on your head _to_ confirm you a
member of the Church, etc., _and that you may_ receive the Holy Ghost,"
and then goes on and pronounces a number of blessings on the person;
but he neither, technically speaking, confirms him a member of the
Church nor bestows on him the Holy Ghost. It would be much better to
make use of such words as will at once accomplish the object. Say, for
example, after calling the person by name, "In the name of Jesus Christ
we confirm you a member of the Church, etc., and say unto you, receive
ye the Holy Ghost." That really covers the ground. But if an Elder's
heart is filled with blessing for the persons to whom he administers,
and the Spirit prompts him to pronounce blessings upon them for their
encouragement, or the strengthening of their hope and faith and virtue;
or if he is prompted to tell them what particular gift the Holy Ghost
will develop within them, or to admonish them against evil, all well
and good; with one of old we say, "Quench not the Spirit, neither
despise prophecy," but let good taste and judgment and the Spirit of
God preside in these things.

Now, as to administering to the sick. Here, from the very nature of
things, the manner of administration is left to the judgment of the
Elders officiating. Still there are general outlines that may be
pointed out even here. The law of the Lord to the Saints is that if
any of them are sick, they are to call for the Elders of the Church;
and they shall pray {491} for them, and anoint them with oil, and the
promise is made that the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and God
will raise them up. (James 5: 13-16.)

It is customary for the Elders, when called upon for two or more of
them to go, and anoint with oil, and it is understood that another
will confirm the anointing, and perhaps will be moved upon to rebuke
the disease and bless the sick with life and health. But the one who
anoints the sick sometimes not only does what he is appointed to do,
but a great deal more. He both anoints and confirms the anointing, and
pronounces every conceivable blessing upon the head of the one to whom
he administers. This would be all right, if he were alone, but when
another is to follow him it is most perplexing to that Elder, as he
feels that there is nothing for him to do. Let those who are called
upon to anoint do that, and do it in the name of the Lord, and to the
end that the person may be restored to health; but let him leave the
rebuking of the sickness and the confirming of the anointing to him who
shall be assigned to perform that part of the ceremony.

Another remark, in passing, respecting anointing. The law of the Lord
is that the sick should be anointed with oil. We know of no commandment
that they should take the oil internally, and through the anointing the
Spirit of the Lord will be conducted to the whole system and renovate
it and make it whole, and there is no need of taking it internally.
Then again some potter around with a spoon as if they were afraid that
a drop too much might be used. Never mind the spoon. Pour on oil from
the vessel in which it was consecrated, and don't be too careful in
using it. Aaron was anointed with oil, according to David, until it
ran down upon his beard on the skirts of his garments, and we have no
account of his complaining about it. We do not make this reference in
order to have the Elders too lavish in the use of oil, but we do think
more than a drop or two should be used, and it should not be used as if
they were afraid of it.

We have not made these remarks for the purpose of binding up the Elders
in their feelings when administering in the ordinances we have named,
but to the end that they may learn their duty in respect of these
things, and have greater liberty of the Spirit in the administrations,
which can only come by having a consciousness of the ability to do them
properly and well.

{492}



THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST.

BY ELDER ORSON F. WHITNEY, IN MILLENNIUM STAR, 1882.

The Gospel of Christ is the science of salvation. Like any other
genuine science, it is based upon eternal truth, and is the compiled,
epitomized result of experience, profound research and intelligent
reflection. It is the condensed product of divine wisdom, the _summum
bonum_ of celestial knowledge, the key to all heavenly mysteries, and
the only way that leadeth unto everlasting life. It embraces all truth,
whether known or unknown. It incorporates all intelligence, both past
and prospective. No righteous principle will ever be revealed, no truth
can possibly be discovered, either in time or in eternity, that does
not in some manner, directly or indirectly, pertain to the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. It is the way of salvation in this life; it is the means
of exaltation in the life to come. It can never be dispensed with, for
it will never cease to be necessary. It is a medium of never-ending
exaltation and advancement. It encompasses all virtue, and precludes
all vice. Error cannot invade its dominions, nor truth transcend its
boundaries. Eternal life, because it includes all other gifts, is
called the greatest gift of God. The Gospel of Jesus Christ, because it
comprehends all principles of progression, is the only means by which
eternal life may be attained and perpetuated.

The principles which compose the Gospel--not merely the first
principles, but all that have been or will ever be revealed--are
self-existent and everlasting in their nature. They have existed from
all eternity, and will endure through all the eternities to come, for
they are absolute, essential, uncreated truths, without beginning of
days or end of years, the same yesterday, today and forever. Concerning
the time, place and method of their compilation--if we may with
propriety assume such an event ever to have occurred--the legislative
process of appropriation, arrangement and systemization, whereby
these self-existent laws were rendered subservient to the designs of
Deity, and made applicable to and operative in {493} the salvation and
exaltation of human souls and worlds, it is not man's present province
to inquire. Such a question would necessarily involve the consideration
of the beginning of God's limitless creations, the beginning of things
which to us have no beginning, a subject so vast and incalculably
comprehensive as to be beyond the conception of any intellect of
inferior capacity to that Master mind which designed and organized the
heavens and the earths, and numbered by and known unto whom, alone,
are all the creations which His mighty hand hath made. It should,
therefore, suffice us to know that the Gospel in its present form is
of inconceivable antiquity; that ages on ages before the foundations
of this earth were laid, ere the morning stars sang together and all
the sons of God shouted for joy, at the hour of its nativity, this
everlasting scheme has been adopted by the heavenly powers as the
means of its predestined sanctification; and moreover that through the
application and operations of this same unchangeable, puissant plan,
millions on millions of worlds, with all their countless hosts of human
and other inhabitants, had been redeemed and glorified prior to the
period when this little planet, our mother earth, was numbered among
the creations of God.

Nothing could be more at variance with all correct ideas concerning the
character and attributes of the great Creator, than to suppose the plan
of life and salvation to be the peculiar property of any one planet, of
any one people or of any particular period of human history. The simple
fact of there being but one such plan in existence--a point which is
not conceded as self-evident, is susceptible of the plainest possible
proof--should be sufficient to refute all such attenuated notions. For,
with this fact once admitted, and a moment's reflection being given to
the bewildering myriads of worlds which the Creator has called into
existence, the numberless multitudes of His creatures which people
them, and the almost universally acknowledged love, providence, care,
protection and solicitude which the eternal parent continually evinces
for the humblest of His offspring and all the workmanship of His hands,
where is the soul so narrow and so bigoted, not to say irreverent and
profane, that would dare to deliberately ascribe to such being--a
being so wise, powerful, impartial, merciful and magnanimous as God is
known and recognized to be--so unwise, weak, petty, puny, unjust and
unmerciful a policy as the one we have in reference! And yet, strange
to say, there are millions of souls who have held, and other millions
who still hold--unless we marvelously misinterpret them {494}--opinions
of this very character. There are many doubtless who would declare,
without giving the matter a second thought, that the foregoing
arguments in support of the scope and antiquity of the Gospel were
nothing more nor less than stupid nonsense and blasphemous presumption,
and in the same breath would asseverate the truth and consistency
of the petty theory which we denounce--and we maintain with good
reason--as false and flimsy in every particular, wholly unfounded in
reason or in revelation, and altogether unworthy of belief. There are
those who, not content with the supposition that the Gospel is solely
the property of this planet, are as resolutely of the opinion that it
dates its origin from that momentous period in the history of the world
when the Son of God came down to perform His mighty mission, in the
midst of the children of men, and that previous to that memorable epoch
there had been no such plan known, in any age, by any portion of the
human family. Consequently their position, if they have any, must be
that the all-wise Legislator who framed the only code of laws whereby
eternal life is made obtainable, allowed four thousand years to pass
away, taking with them into endless torment, multitudes of His begotten
sons and daughters, many of them among the most righteous men and women
that have ever walked the earth, before He placed within the reach
of fallen humanity the only way possible for men to be saved. Such a
theory might have done for the dark ages, or at the present time may
suit the narrow views of such as "know not God nor the things of God,"
but to all whose understandings have been quickened and enlightened by
the high-soaring, deep-searching Spirit of Truth, such absurd notions
are not overfraught with sense and consistency.

The idea which seems to prevail that the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that
marvel of all that is wise, just, comprehensive and powerful, was
devised for the redemption of a solitary world, or for the benefit of
one, to the exclusion of another portion of its inhabitants, is on a
par with the ancient but long since exploded hypothesis that the sun,
moon and stars were only temporary luminaries, hung up in the midst of
the firmament, for the purpose of lighting this little earth through
its mortal probation, and which, like so many lamps, whose "occupation
would be gone," having survived the necessity of their invention,
would be extinguished and put away forever, as soon as the earth
had completed its temporal career. But happily the light of divine
truth, beaming through the atmosphere of science, has dispelled that
senseless delusion. {495} Furthermore, it is now known, thanks be to
God for reopening the long closed oracles of eternity, that not only
are there other worlds than this, but like this, those other worlds
are inhabited, peopled by beings similar to the occupants of earth,
the population of one planet differing only from those of others in
the various degrees of perfection which they have severally attained
through the principles of the Gospel of unceasing progression. By
those who have bowed in humility before the fountain of all truth and
intelligence, and taken a fresh draught of the renovating waters of
life, it is now understood that that God who never spoke or wrought in
vain, or created anything to subserve a puerile purpose, instituted
the plan of salvation for the temporal and spiritual regeneration,
not only of His offspring upon this planet, but likewise of those
upon multitudes of similar planets, which have been or will yet be
brought forth, redeemed and celestialized by the application of its
wonder-making power. It is now definitely known that the Everlasting
Gospel did not originate on this earth at all, nor for the first
time appear in the midst of mankind when John the Baptist came forth
proclaiming its initiatory principles in the wilderness of Judea.
However strange it may have appeared to the bigoted and benighted
Jews, who for centuries, through unbelief and hardness of heart, had
been deprived of its gifts and blessings, it was not by any means "a
new thing under the sun." Its introduction in those days was simply
a restoration of the Gospel, and that highly favored period was but
one among many such dispensations, and neither the first nor the last
which the descendants of Adam were destined to receive. It was simply
the dispensation of the meridian of time, during which the sacrificial
Lamb, "slain from the foundation of the world," descended from
celestial glory to pay the penalty of man's original sin, and by the
retroactive and proactive virtue of His atonement, make it possible,
through obedience to His Gospel, for all men in all ages to be saved.

Is it a thing so strange and unaccountable to the Christian world, that
such men as Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham and other ancient worthies who
walked and talked with God, as friend to friend, and were clothed upon
with the fullness of the authority of His Holy Priesthood, should have
been vouch-safed the precious privilege of yielding obedience to the
Gospel of Jesus Christ--"the only name given under heaven whereby man
can be saved?" Were Peter, James, John, Paul and others who happened
to be living upon the earth when the Savior came and were permitted
to partake of the blessings {496} which flow from obedience to the
principles of eternal life, more worthy of that privilege than their
predecessors, the more ancient patriarchs and prophets of God? Such
an idea is repugnant to reason, and utterly unentitled to credence or
respect. Let those continue to cherish such thoughts who persist in
rejecting the genuine faith and perpetuate the narrowness of their
minds by shutting out the soul expanding influences of the gift of
the Holy Ghost. For our own part we prefer to know otherwise, to
rejoice in the conviction obtained through compliance with the Gospel
of the Son of God, that this same everlasting, unchangeable plan of
redemption, without which no man can be elevated to the presence of
his Maker, was known to the human family at various times during the
intervening ages between the creation and the coming of Christ, and in
every instance was revealed and established for the identical purposes
which induced its institution in the days of the Savior, and for which
it has again, for the last time, been brought back to earth in this
the dispensation of the fullness of times. It is true that the Holy
Bible, which all Christians profess to believe, and which so far as
correctly translated, the Latter-day Saints actually do believe, though
plainly foretelling the Gospel's restoration in the latter days, is
more or less silent upon the subject of the dispensations preceding
the meridian of time. But it is also true that that good old book
is silent upon a great many other important points, thanks to the
interpolations, erasions, alterations and rejections of uninspired
translators, commentators and compilers, to whose unauthorized, blind
and blundering administrations in the premises, are largely due the
endless divisions, discords and differences, which have raked and rent
asunder the religious world for centuries. But independent of the
taciturnity of the Scriptures, and aside from the incontrovertible
evidence furnished by modern revelation, we respectfully submit to the
consideration of all candid, unbiased believers in God and the Gospel
of Salvation, whether the views we maintain, compared with the opinions
we oppose, are not more consistent with reason, more harmonious with
the Spirit of Holy Writ, and more perfectly in unison with all advanced
ideas respecting the wisdom, power, justice, mercy and magnanimity of
Almighty God?

From the foregoing observations concerning the character, origin,
object, powers and possibilities of the great science of salvation,
the inquiring mind would naturally be led to the consideration of the
question, What is the Gospel of Jesus Christ? or, in other words--since
the impracticability of completely {497} answering so comprehensive
an interrogation has already been shown--what are its initiatory
principles? At the risk of wearying some of our veteran readers,
already conversant with the subject, but with a sincere desire to
benefit them, as well as others who are less fortunate with respect
to the information involved, we here propose to present a brief
digest of what are familiarly known to the Latter-day Saints as the
first principles of the Gospel; the code of laws which constitute the
beginning of salvation's endless system; the preface, as it were, to
the book of everlasting progression; the four primitive archways by
which the path of eternal progress is attained, and through which the
souls of all men must pass in order to reach the celestial presence
of their Maker. These four principles, it will be seen, are serial
and progressive in their nature, each one naturally leading into
its successor, paving the way before and preparing the soul for its
reception.

FAITH.

The Holy Bible informs us that without faith it is impossible to
please God. Such a declaration even from a source less sacred, need
occasion no surprise whatever; for without faith it is impossible to
do anything. From the smallest act to the mightiest achievement, all
things are the effects of faith. It is the cause of every consequence,
the power by which all things possible are performed. Nothing was
ever accomplished either in heaven or on earth that was not preceded
and accompanied by the exercise of faith. The insect creeps, the bird
flies, the fish swims, by faith; the flowers spring, the grasses grow,
the trees bloom and bear, by faith; the infant prattles, the man toils,
the God creates, upholds, redeems and glorifies His workmanship, by
faith. It is the main-spring of life, the motive power of creation,
the active principle of the entire universe. Hence it is necessarily
the first principle of the Gospel, the initial element of salvation,
the basic principle or foundation law upon which all other laws and
principles rest. The soul that would attain salvation must first
believe salvation possible. He must believe in God as the Giver of
salvation. He must believe in Christ, as its Author and Mediator. He
must believe in the Gospel, as the medium through which salvation is
secured, and in the divine authority of the individual who as a servant
of God administers the ordinances of the Gospel in His behalf. Having
exercised faith to the extent thus indicated, he is in a position to
undertake the succeeding {498} venture, to ascend the next step higher
upon the grand stairway leading to eternal life.

REPENTANCE.

Sin cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. It is so entirely opposed, so
essentially antagonistic to the spirit of righteousness, that the two
cannot possibly dwell together. God does not look upon sin with the
least degree of allowance. Consequently the soul which aspires to His
presence, which expects to behold His face and be able to endure His
glory, must be previously cleansed and purified from all sin. Now, no
soul was ever successful in getting rid of its sins that did not first
sincerely repent of them. No fault was ever corrected that was not
first discovered and confessed; no habit was ever reformed that had not
first been freely acknowledged; and no sin can in any wise be remitted
until its perpetration has been truly repented of, and its perpetrator
is resolutely resolved against its repetition. It is useless for any
accountable being to say that he is without sin. The Scriptures declare
that all men are sinful and that no man can truthfully claim exemption
from the universal imputation. Little children (under eight years) are
not responsible for their acts, and being sinless and therefore unable
to repent, are redeemed by the blood of Christ from the foundation of
the world. But all accountable souls, to whom the Gospel of salvation
is sent, must repent of and forsake their evil ways, habits, deeds
and desires, if they wish to make any headway in the pursuit of the
precious prize of everlasting exaltation.

BAPTISM BY IMMERSION.

Baptism is symbolical of the burial and resurrection of Christ, and as
an ordinance of the Gospel was instituted for the remission of sins.
The only proper mode of its administration is by immersion, whereby
the two events above mentioned may be illustrated. "We are buried
with Him by baptism into death," says Paul, "that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together
(buried in water) in the likeness of His death, we shall be also (by
coming forth out of the water) in the likeness of His resurrection."
Even as Christ, by descending into death, put off the mortality in
which He was clothed, and rose triumphant to a higher sphere of action,
so we by going down {499} into the liquid grave, put away the sins
and follies of the flesh, and are brought forth to "a life divinely
new." Hence it is that baptism is also called a birth, and Christ, in
declaring to Nicodemus that a man must be "born of the water and of
the spirit," plainly signified emergence from the womb of the waters
as a prerequisite to His entrance into the Kingdom of God. He not
only pointed this out as the way in which others should walk, but by
submitting to baptism himself, He set the example of "fulfilling all
righteousness," and was greeted from the heavens, as the result of His
obedience, by the voice of God, declaring: "This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased." Nevertheless, water of itself cannot wash
away sins. Not even immersion, though in strict accordance with the
method prescribed, could have the slightest effect upon the soul of
the penitent sinner, unless performed by a person holding authority
from on High. God recognizes no administrations but those of His chosen
and commissioned servants, clothed upon with the power of the Holy
Priesthood, as was John the Baptist; "called of God as was Aaron," and
sent forth by the voice of divine revelation to open wide the portals
of eternal life to all who are willing to walk in that straight and
narrow way which, on account of worldly pride and perversity, but few
souls are able to find. But all repentant believers, who are baptized
in the proper manner and by the proper authority, are acceptable in the
sight of high heaven, and can confidently rely upon the promise made by
Peter to the believing portion of the Pentecostal multitude: "Repent
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the

GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST."

The Spirit of God, in certain measure, is universally distributed. It
is the light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. By it
and through it all things live, move and have their being. It

  "Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze, Glows in the stars, and
  blossoms in the trees, Lives through all life, extends through all
  extent, Spreads undivided, operates unspent."

But the Gift of the Holy Ghost--bestowed by the "laying on of hands"
upon every faithful, penitent, baptized believer in the true Church
of Christ--is a special endowment for {500} special purposes. It may
possibly be a superior quality, or it may be only an increased quantity
of that universal essence which pervades all animated nature throughout
the illimitable realms of space. But be that as it may, it is certain
that this Gift, this Comforter, this Spirit of Truth, which sustains
the soul, enlightens the mind, leads into all truth, and enables the
spirit of man to comprehend the otherwise incomprehensible things of
God, is an important addition to the original possession and like it is
susceptible of further increase, cultivation and development. Through
obedience and righteousness it may be made to grow and expand, until
sin is entirely banished, until the eye is made single to the glory of
God, and the whole body is filled with life and light. By disobedience
and unrighteousness it will readily decrease and diminish until the
light of the soul is utterly extinguished, and darkness, despair
and spiritual death ensue. A fullness of God's Holy Spirit should,
therefore, be the grand object of human existence, for by it alone
can the soul of man be eternally exalted and glorified. Still there
are various kinds of "fullness," even as there are different degrees
of glory, corresponding to the various merits and capacities of those
who rise in the resurrection. The fullness which each soul obtains
will be of that particular glory--either Celestial, Terrestrial or
Telestial--by which its body is quickened from the grave. The "fullness
of the Father" constitutes Celestial exaltation, and this, though not
a thing to be suddenly attained, should be the soul-absorbing aim and
ambition of every son and daughter of God. We should begin to acquire
it now, for all may rest assured that the dispensation of these
eternal awards will be strictly in accordance with and regulated by
the deeds done in the body. Christ, our Savior, it appears, acquired
and possessed a fullness while on earth. But pure and spotless though
He was, He did not receive that fullness at first, but afterwards
received it. By constantly growing in grace and godliness, living from
day to day by every word that proceeded forth from the mouth of God, He
gradually became entitled to the steadily increasing possession of the
Holy Spirit, till finally "it pleased the Father that in Him should all
fullness dwell." We all have it in our power to do and become likewise.
He is our great Guide and Exemplar. As He was pure, we must be pure;
as He was obedient, we must likewise be; as He became perfect and was
found free from all fault or blemish before the throne of God, even
so we must become, if we expect to be conformed to His image, inherit
His celestial glory, possess a fullness of His {501} Spirit, become
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, and have an eternal
residence in those heavenly mansions prepared for the righteous and the
faithful before the foundation of the world.

That the Gospel of Jesus Christ is necessarily one and unchangeable,
and with the foregoing as its first or initiatory principles, a perfect
and therefore exclusive system of salvation is a proposition which,
however unpopular, is susceptible, as previously asserted, of the
plainest possible proof. The Holy Scriptures abound in evidences of
this fact, and reason amply supports revelation in confirmation of its
truth. The Apostle Peter, the highest authority of his times, after
the ascension of the Savior, declares (Acts 4: 4) that "there is none
other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved."
This passage alone is sufficient to prove the unity of Christ as the
Savior of the world and likewise to substantiate the fact that even
if there could be another Gospel possessing efficacy as a medium of
salvation, it also would have to be a Gospel of Jesus Christ, since He
is the sole author of salvation to all the inhabitants of the earth.
But Paul, another Apostle, in the fourth chapter of his epistle to the
Ephesians, testifies of "one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one Spirit,"
and plainly demonstrates that one of the principal objects of the
Gospel, by means of its inspired Priesthood and spiritual gifts, is the
bringing of its believers to a "unity of the faith," previous to their
being made perfect in Christ; and this, too, corresponds beautifully
with the pathetic prayer of the Savior himself (John xvii.), that His
disciples might be made "perfect in one," and become one with Him even
as He was already one with His Father in heaven.

Paul also, in another place, denouncing the apostasy of the Galatian
churches (Galatians i, 8, 9), and the efforts of certain persons to
institute "another Gospel" and pervert the true Gospel of Christ,
employs the following forcible language: "Though we, or an angel
from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed!" and in order to render
his meaning still more plain, unmistakable and emphatic, he repeats
the injunction as follows: "If any man preach any other Gospel unto
you than that ye have received, let him be accursed." These inspired
utterances are too obvious and intelligible to be misunderstood by any
honest-hearted reader of the Holy Scriptures. They show as plainly
as words can possibly show that the Gospel of Christ is one, and
unchangeable in its nature, the same yesterday, today and forever;
that its object is the temporal and eternal union of its converts,
and that it was designed for the {502} benefit and blessing of all
humanity, especially for such as would believe and faithfully obey its
principles. And why should it be otherwise? God is not the author of
strife and confusion. He is essentially a lover and promoter of union,
and looks with no favor upon those who evince a contrary disposition.
He would be the last to encourage, either by thought, word or action,
anything having the slightest tendency towards discord, disunion and
division. Peace and union are among the prevailing characteristics
of His nature, and order, system and eternal harmony are widely
manifest in all His wondrous workmanship. We cannot conceive of such
a Being, whose avowed purpose is the bringing of His offspring to a
oneness of profession and practice, engaging in the institution or
promotion of any cause whose inclination would be directly inimical
to the attainment of His fondest desires, and laying aside the basic
principles of His union-loving, harmony-enhancing nature, to inaugurate
strife and contention on earth, and engender difference and disputation
among His children upon that greatest and most vitally important of all
questions, the eternal salvation of their souls. And would not such
consequences ensue, were He to reveal to the human family more than one
method of attaining salvation?

The present religious aspect of the Christian world, with its
heterogeneous multiplicity of jarring, contending sects, all differing,
disputing and dividing among themselves, yet each one claiming to be
the true Church of Christ should be a sufficient answer. For if puny
man, by apostatizing from truth and concocting such a vast variety of
ways and means for worshiping his Maker, can create such a pandemonium
of doctrinal discord as that which ecclesiastical Christendom--to say
nothing of heathendom--displays, then what might not the Almighty
accomplish in the same direction, were it not in diametrical opposition
to His principles to descend to the perpetration of such folly and
wickedness, and thereby defeat the fulfillment of His most cherished
designs, besides dooming unnumbered myriads of His begotten offspring
to spiritual death and destruction!

We might continue this argument _ad infinitum_ from a biblical point
of view, but without going further into that divine record in quest
of proofs which are scattered as thickly as summer sunbeams over its
sacred pages, let us now survey the subject from another standpoint and
see whether reason alone will not bear out the belief that "this Gospel
of the Kingdom," which was to be and now is being "preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations," {503} before the coming of "the
end," is the one and only system of salvation that has ever been or
ever will be revealed from heaven for the redemption and exaltation of
the human family.

It is to be presumed that there are but few, if any, sincere believers
in God or in any form of religion, bearing the name of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, who would willingly assert that the letter could
be anything else than a perfect plan of salvation. The Almighty,
as a perfect being, is necessarily perfect in all His ways and
works, and any system or science devised by Him for the temporal or
spiritual regeneration of our race, would consequently be faultless
in construction, consummate in operation and thoroughly capable of
fulfilling every requirement of its existence. These facts being
admitted, we must immediately concede the unity and exclusiveness of
the Gospel of Christ. How so? it might be asked. For the following
reasons: A perfect Gospel is of necessity an exclusive Gospel, for of
any two such systems, which for argument's sake, we will say might be
revealed, one of them must as a matter of course be inferior. No two
things can be created exactly alike, and therefore, speaking in the
strictest sense of the term, no such thing as equality can possibly
exist. But even if it could, in the present instance, what would be the
use of two Gospels made exactly alike for precisely the same purpose?
The Creator is a wise economist, but such an act would be superfluous
and extravagant in the highest degree. But they could not be exactly
alike. One of them, as explained, would have to be inferior, for only
one of the twain could be perfect, and hence completely competent to
fulfill the exact measure of their mutual formation. The superior
Gospel would be the creation of God, and it alone; for the inferior
one, being imperfect and therefore defective in its organization and
capacity, could not possibly proceed from Him, since there is no such
thing as imperfection extant in all His handiwork. It is true, His
creature, man, is at present very imperfect, but not so originally.
God made man upright, says Solomon, "but they have sought out many
inventions." On the morning of creation, he, with all the rest of the
Creator's great workmanship, was made perfect and pronounced "very
good," but he afterward fell into transgression, which is always the
downward path, and through his own sins and follies has steadily
degenerated to his present fallen condition. Now it is only by means
of a perfect Gospel that he can be regenerated {504} and raised to the
high and perfect position from which he fell, and such a one is the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, the subject we are now considering.

A perfect Gospel comprehending all truth, all intelligence, all
principles of progression, is necessarily sole and exclusive in its
nature. It actually precludes, not only the necessity, but likewise
the possibility of the existence of any other Gospel having genuine
efficacy and saving virtue. For being complete and perfect in all its
parts, all inclusive, all absorbent, all powerful, all sufficient in
character and capability, as the greater, it would certainly comprehend
the less, and not only deprive it, if existing, of any room or occasion
to operate, but if not existing, would leave no extra, unusual material
for its construction. So that whichever alternative is chosen, by such
as may be disposed to question the validity of our position, it is
clearly the case that any other Gospel, besides the only one that ever
did, ever will, or in the very nature of things ever can exist, would
either be superfluous or impossible; and to accuse the all-wise Creator
of committing either folly, would be an insult to His intelligence
and a profanation of His character. Mankind may invent, as mankind
has already invented, systems upon systems of so-called religion, and
falsely call them, to his greater condemnation, by the sacred name
of Him who died that all men might live, and some of these man-made
methods of worship, or rather idolatry, though all are imperfect and
defective, like their clay creators, may be exceedingly plausible and
popular with their professors, nor yet entirely devoid of grains and
particles of truth. Nevertheless they are all illegal and unauthorized
of God, who will utterly refuse to recognize the usurped authority,
unlawful establishment and unhallowed administrations, or to accept
of the fruits of any faith or form of worship, whatsoever, aside
from those of the everlasting, unchangeable Gospel of His Son Jesus
Christ. The Gospel of Jesus Christ! That sole and exclusive system
of salvation, that perfect and perpetual science of progression,
that marvelous and mysterious plan, so plain, so simple, and withal
so powerful; so admirably adapted to the needs and capacity of every
soul, from the highest to the humblest intelligence ever tabernacled
in mortal flesh, and so amply capable of subserving the far-reaching
purposes of Omnipotent Creator, as to be the all essential method of
salvation in this life, and the indispensable medium of unceasing
exaltation in the life to come!

It is a matter of easy comprehension in the ordinary affairs of life,
why obedience to any natural law must of necessity {505} precede the
attainment of its legitimate result. The accountant at his desk knows
perfectly well that in order to obtain the sum of a column of figures
he must first employ one of the fundamental rules of the science of
mathematics; the chemist in his laboratory is equally aware that the
blending of certain elements, in accordance with established rules of
the science with which he is operating, is absolutely essential to
the formation of the compound which he desires; the student at school
who aspires to honors and efficiency in the course he is pursuing, is
fully as well satisfied that faithful application and a certain line
of deportment is indispensable to insure him a successful examination,
with its subsequent reward or recognition of merit; the alien desiring
citizenship, when once informed of the fact, seldom, if ever, hesitates
to question the advisability of "taking out his papers," or going
through certain forms of law, in order that he may be qualified to
exercise the rights and privileges of a member of the commonwealth;
and it is self-evident that the traveler, who wishes to arrive with
all possible speed and security at his destination, must previously
select and intently pursue the shortest, safest and most feasible route
leading in the right direction. These facts are patent to the poorest
comprehension.

Why is it, then, that so many, to whom the above illustrations are
so simple and self-evident, fail to see the analogy which exists
with reference to the great Gospel or science of salvation, and the
obedience to its laws, principles and requirements so imperatively
essential to admission into an eternal inheritance in the Celestial
Kingdom of God? Why is it that so many millions, notwithstanding
the plainest and most pointed declarations of inspired Scripture,
the examples and testimonies of the Savior and holy men of old,
corroborated by the God-given human reason, profanely and recklessly
insist on asserting that compliance with the sacred and everlasting
laws and ordinances of salvation is no longer necessary to accomplish
the very object of their institution, and vainly imagine or assume
to suppose that it is possible to reach the presence of their Maker
without putting into practice the immutable principles upon which all
celestial promises are predicated, and responding fully and faithfully
to the requirements invariably made of those who become possessed
of this inestimable privilege? Why is it that the accountant cannot
see that eternal life is the sum of all existence, and that all who
would obtain it must add together faith and good works, unceasingly,
employing all rules, both fundamental {506} and superstructive, of
salvation's endless science, in order to solve the otherwise insoluble
problem of this life and acquire the grand total of life everlasting in
the world to come? Why is it that the chemist cannot perceive that the
all-containing compound of eternal happiness is only to be produced by
the careful and judicious mixture of the elements of eternal salvation
while man yet lingers in the laboratory of his mortal probation?
How can the student in the precious school of earthly experience,
who fails to improve his time and learn well the lessons assigned
to him in this intermediate department of God's great University,
hope to pass a successful examination at His Judgment Seat, to merit
or attain possession of the "greatest gift of God," and be blessed
with the opportunities of entering upon a higher course of studies
in a never ending future of education and experience, if he does not
win and present a properly signed and attested certificate of good
conduct while here, and of complete and thorough preparation for the
ineffable and interminable hereafter? Why does the alien of the world,
who professes to seek Citizenship in the Celestial Commonwealth,
foolishly doubt the necessity of taking the oath of naturalization,
renouncing all foreign allegiance, responsibilities and relationship,
and conforming to the plain and positive regulations by means of which
alone he can even so much as enter into the Gates of the Golden City,
to say nothing of exercising and enjoying the rights, privileges and
possessions accorded to its humble, faithful, obedient and law-abiding
inhabitants? Or why should the traveler of time, the pilgrim to a
promised paradise, as he journeys through this weary wilderness,
entertain the expectation that he can avoid the pitfalls, snares and
dangers which beset his pathway at every step, and arrive with safety
and all possible expedition to the flowery outskirts of the dark and
dreary desert, where the arms of a loving and sympathetic Savior are
waiting open and ready to receive him, if he does not pursue the
straight, narrow and only practicable route tending in the proper
direction?--in the direction of Him who explored the waste, pioneered
and opened up the way, brushing and clearing it with His own bleeding
hands and feet, of many of its sharpest rocks and crudest thorns and
brambles, planting innumerable guideposts and danger signals along the
line of the perilous probation, thereby making it not only possible,
but comparatively easy for all men to follow in His footsteps, to
inherit bowers of eternal bliss and gardens of unspeakable glory
beyond, but solemnly and repeatedly asseverating, both before and after
{507} the close of his brave and remarkable career, that there is none
other way under the whole heaven whereby the same pilgrimage can be
accomplished and the devoutedly wished for consummation attained.

Some will doubtless contend that the cases above mentioned, though
capable of parabolical comparison, are not practically analogous in
their nature; that the ordinary process employed by the accountant,
the chemist, the student, the alien and the traveler, are matters
of plain and practical fact, self-evident truths, susceptible of
the easiest elucidation, and do not therefore demand, for their
acceptance, the exercise of that faith or far-reaching credulity, so
indispensably pre-requisite to the investigation of the Gospel, and
the acknowledgment of implicit obedience to its principles as the sole
alternative to the sacrifice of all hopes of celestial exaltation. In
reply to this argument, since to all who would put it forth it would
be waste of time and trouble to quote Scripture, we desire to propound
two questions. By what means have the so-called self-evident truths
of modern science, art, invention, philosophy, etc.--now, but not
always, so easily explained and understood--become the plainly proved
and firmly established facts that we find them at the present time?
Does not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the perfect and perpetual plan of
salvation, purposely made simple and comprehensible--as great things
invariably are--in order that even the wayfaring man, though a fool,
might not needfully err therein--does it not exhibit upon its face
ample and indubitable evidences of the power and efficacy which it
claims, and has been proven by unnumbered millions to possess? To the
first question we unhesitatingly assert, without fear of successful
contradiction, that every truth now known to mortal man has at some
period in its history been more or less the subject of his doubt and
conjecture, if not of his open and avowed hostility and unbelief,
and that without any exception their adoption, establishment and
development on earth have been directly due to the exercise of what
some people are pleased to confound with the term credulity, but
which we prefer to designate by the more dignified and appropriate
title of faith, all-powerful faith, a principle whose necessity
as the foundation or mainspring of all action and success, is as
self-evident as any other fact under heaven, and without which, as a
necessary consequence, no truth whatever could have been brought forth,
proven and perpetuated in the mind and memory of man. The exercise of
faith, the humility and willingness to make experiments, the honesty
and courage to proclaim results, {508} the fortitude and patience
to endure the taunts, the sneers, the threats and even persecutive
violence of the ignorant, unprincipled, selfish, skeptical, unthinking
and depraved--the latter incited by Satan, the resister and would-be
destroyer of right, and the former pushed on and inspired by Almighty
God, the great leader of the vanguard in the eternal march of human
progress;--these and these alone are the invincible agencies which have
converted popular opinion and transformed the once "crazy notions,"
"impossible theories," "wild speculations" and "manifest absurdities"
of "crack-brained" genius and philosophy, into the since time-honored
maxims, venerable proverbs, world-accepted facts and self-evident
propositions, and the many marvelous artistic triumphs and scientific
achievements now so popular and prevalent in the world, and of which
the world that formerly despised and persecuted their incipiency, with
its customary conceit and inconsistency, is at present so vainglorious
and proud. Faith and good works, those inseparable, Siamese twins of
Gospel efficacy, have done all that ever has been or ever will be
done, in heaven or on earth, for the benefit and blessing of humanity,
while blind, bigoted unbelief and cold-hearted skepticism, though
always the loudest to boast of the world's advancement, especially
if it advances in wickedness, have as invariably been the persistent
opposers and stumbling-blocks in the way of all righteous progress
and development. As to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, every principle
of which, on fair and honest investigation, will be found abundantly
capable of demonstrating its own power and saving virtue, we dare and
do maintain, from ample observation and individual experience, that it
requires far more credulity to disbelieve the validity of its claim to
being "the power of God unto salvation," than faith for its acceptance
and acknowledgment as the one and only medium through which the souls
of men and the planet upon which they dwell can be saved, sanctified
and celestialized forevermore.

Hear it, ye nations and inhabitants of the earth! Hear it and give
heed, while yet the Gospel trump is sounding through the streets of
your cities, and its receding echoes are ringing and reverberating
from your hills and highways! Hear it and heed it, while the lingering
twilight of hope keeps back the fast descending night of despair;
while the "swift messengers" of salvation are still going forth,
and the acceptance of their warning message will avail. Despise
not the humble testimonies of those unlettered oracles of God, for
every word they deliver is rife with the fate of men and nations,
and simultaneous {509} with their utterance on earth, the busy pens
of recording angels are enrolling them upon the archives of eternal
judgment. Remember that from humblest and apparently weakest causes,
have ofttimes sprung the highest, wisest and mightiest results, and
if the Gospel is plain and simple in construction, and its advocates
and adherents among the poorest and most illiterate of men, that the
Almighty has purposely made them so, that the faith of the proud world
might be tested, that its population, high and low, rich and poor,
learned and unlearned, might be left without excuse for its rejection,
and that to God, not man, might redound all honor and glory for the
triumph which His omnipotent truth is destined to achieve. Put away
all prejudice and narrow pre-conceptions, close your ears against the
voice of misrepresentation and calumny, shake off the cloak and coil
of cowardice, smother the selfish promptings of worldly interest, and
while you sacrifice the paltry things of earth, remember that you
are laying up eternal treasures in heaven. "Choose ye this day whom
ye will serve!" The line of demarkation is being drawn, the times of
separating, sifting and sorting are at hand, and the worshipers of God
and Mammom henceforth must cease to mingle and commune. The night of
doubt is ended. The day of decision has dawned. Truth and Error have
taken the field, their hostile hosts are already in battle array,
and the trumpets of both sides are sounding loudly for volunteers,
summoning the earth's inhabitants to the Armogeddon of Almighty God.
On which side will you fight? Which cause are you willing to be found
defending to the death? Be wise in choice. Be instant in decision! But
above all things be not dazzled and deceived.

  "Truth, crushed to earth, will rise again,
  The eternal years of God are hers;
  But error, wounded, writhes with pain,
  And dies amid his worshipers."

{510}



THE MISUSE OF POWER.

BY ELDER ORSON F. WHITNEY, IN MILLENNIAL STAR, 1882.

The severest test to which human virtue may possibly be subjected
is the possession of unlimited power. Man may be ruled and wronged,
persecuted and trampled upon, and the vitality and sweetness of
his character will survive the tyranny of his oppressors, and like
the shamrock of Ireland, which is said to take root and flourish
when trodden under foot, gain strength and endurance from the very
means employed for its destruction. But give him his own way, remove
all restraints and barriers between him and the gratification of
his selfish desires, and he is a strong man indeed who completely
withstands the temptation.

The term power may imply lofty and influential position, boundless
wealth, or intellectual eminence, or it may embrace in its definition
all sources of dominion together; but whether considered singly or
collectively, it can make no material difference. The rule finds
general application. History is replete with examples of individuals
and communities, kings and kingdoms, chiefs and armies, priests and
churches, presidents and peoples, illustrative of the almost inevitable
misfortune which results from investing mankind with extraordinary
power and authority. Heroes have risen and fallen, dynasties have
flourished and decayed, races have bloomed and withered, empires have
been founded and destroyed; and in nearly every instance, either
directly or indirectly, their downfall and destruction have been due
to an improper use of the gifts and powers they were permitted to
exercise. The opportunities afforded for the indulgence of pride and
selfishness, the unbridled facilities presented for the gratification
of passion, and the perpetration of every species of wickedness, with
the thousand and one historical proofs of the proneness even of the
greatest and most virtuous to succumb to these allurements of vice,
to say nothing of the incumbent labors and responsibilities, are
sufficient, it would seem, to make the tenure of earthly authority, or
the possession of vast wealth, among the most undesirable attainments.

{511} Let it not be inferred that we regard such things as essentially
evil, or consider all aims and efforts in their direction as
necessarily debasing in their tendency. Far from it. It is not wealth,
but the inordinate love of it, that is "the root of all evil;" it is
not the possession, but the perversion of power, that is the bane of
man's happiness and prosperity. It is no more of an evil to hold power
than to possess wealth, and no more of a sin to possess wealth than to
enjoy any other blessing which flows from the Giver of all good; for
as long as heaven has gifts to bestow, there must needs be those who
will receive them and those who are best entitled to be the recipients
are those who endeavor to deserve them and are qualified to use them
in wisdom and righteousness, for the glory of God and the welfare of
their fellow men. It is not the honest aim for, nor the proper exercise
of these advantages, that are deserving subjects of deprecation and
disparagement, but it is the misuse of power, the prostitution of
wealth, the neglect or abuse of any of the blessings of life, and the
unhallowed methods employed in their acquisition, that are and ever
will be, legitimate objects of denunciation and discouragement. So
far from its being wrong to aim for superiority and excellence in any
righteous direction, it is exactly the reverse. Our Father in heaven
expects it of us. He demands that His children advance unceasingly
towards power, wealth and intelligence illimitable. His motto is upward
and onward, His course is one eternal round of progression, and His
constant exhortation is, to follow in His footsteps; and as long as we
have in view the exaltation that He has attained and confine ourselves
strictly to the methods which He has ordained for its accomplishment,
there is no danger of our being too ambitious or of making an improper
use of the powers He will eventually bestow. But it is here in this
weak mortal state, where our eyes are dazzled by the tinsel of earthly
vanities, where our ears are enchanted by the dulcet but delusive notes
of fame, and our feet are so apt to be seduced from the paths of virtue
by the gilded snares of vice; it is here that there is an ever present
danger of misusing the gifts and blessings we are privileged to enjoy,
and it is this continuous and extreme liability that should render
the acquisition of earthly power and wealth, to the great majority of
mankind, exceedingly undesirable. All men who hold position do not
abuse its privileges, and the man who serves God humbly and faithfully
never will, for the moment he yielded to the temptation so to do, that
moment would he cease to serve the Lord; but there are many, alas! who
sadly misuse {512} the functions of their office, and prostitute every
power and privilege to the gratification of self and the injury and
embarrassment of their fellow men. It is dangerous to put some men into
power. They swell up and become so distended with the ideas of their
greatness and importance, that we are forcibly reminded of so many
inflated toy balloons, which the slightest prick of a pin would burst
and ruin forever. A very small office and a very little authority is
sufficient to intoxicate some men and render them entirely unfit for
duty.

The Prophet Joseph, in the course of a prophecy uttered in March, 1839,
speaks as follows:

    "We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and
    disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little
    brief authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to
    exercise unrighteous dominion;" and in two preceding paragraphs
    of the same, these words occur: "The rights of the priesthood are
    inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and the powers of
    heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles
    of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us, it is
    true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our
    pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control, or dominion, or
    compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree
    of unrighteousness, behold the heavens withdraw themselves, the
    Spirit of the Lord is grieved and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the
    Priesthood or the authority of that man."

It is a certain indication of a weak mind when it can be overturned by
a brief draught of authority. Like a ship which spreads sail, but lacks
the necessary tonnage to hold it level with the sea, the individual who
hoists his pride on high and is devoid of the indispensable ballast of
common sense, will speedily run on to ruin and oblivion. Solomon never
said a wiser thing than that "Pride goeth beside destruction; and an
haughty spirit before a fall." But the truly great man is never so
affected. Too broad and deep and sensible to be dazzled by terrestrial
splendor and too intent upon his purpose to be swayed or directed by
the flattery of the fawning multitude, instead of being elevated, he is
more apt to be humbled by promotion to power, or if he ever feels its
influence, it is like new wine refreshing a giant, not like a seltzer
draught overcoming a dwarf.

Some men evidently deem it their duty to be ambitious for distinction,
on the principle, we suppose, that if the mountain will not come to
Mahomet, Mahomet must go to the mountain. While this may be measurably
true with regard to worldly matters, it is not so respecting the things
of the Kingdom of God. No Latter-day Saint need aim for power or
position in the Church of Jesus Christ. If he be destined to {513} hold
office in the Priesthood, or to occupy any post of honor within the
gift of that Priesthood, he can afford to wait in patience for it to
come to him, for come it will, in the due time of the Lord, Mahomet's
mountain to the contrary notwithstanding; but if he is not destined for
the position to which he aspires, despite his most strenuous efforts
he will be the victim of disappointment; or if permitted to reach the
height of the ambition, it will be but to fall therefrom when his folly
and his weakness shall have been made fully manifest. It is madness to
rush needlessly into peril. Duty and necessity are the only motives
which should impel any one into an encounter with temptation. The only
assurance of complete victory over sin, after bravely meeting and
conquering the temptations that can be safely met and resisted, is in
avoiding all others which God never intended us to meet, and which as
a consequence, we would find it impossible to overcome. A little done
well brings a much higher blessing than a great deal undertaken and
unworthily performed. Let him who lusts after wealth and aspires to
earthly honors beyond the station in which it has pleased the Almighty
to place him, ponder this well in his heart. Let him ask himself if he
is qualified to make a wise use of the things he covets, if he is able
to bear up under the heavy responsibilities they entail, and strong
enough to resist successfully the temptations which would assail him
on every hand; and if he is satisfied of this, let him recollect that
God selects for His rulers those who have been humble and faithful
in subordinate capacities, and that it is far more admirable to wait
for, than to openly invite recognition and promotion. By the faithful
discharge of the duties of his humbler calling, let him prove himself
worthy of the honors of a higher, and having attained the summit of his
hopes, the possession of the power, the wealth and the intelligence he
craved, let him carefully exercise those gifts in the fear of the Lord
and the love of his fellowmen, lest he prove recreant to his trust,
turn traitor to his God and be hurled from his exaltation like Lucifer
from Heaven.

{514}



HAPPINESS FOR THE SORROWFUL.

BY APOSTLE ORSON PRATT, IN MILLENNIAL STAR, 1866.

Who is the happy man? Is it the king upon his throne? Is it the mighty
emperor who sways the destiny of millions? Does happiness consist in
ruling, in judging, in politics, in thrones, in palaces, in earthly
grandeur? Does it consist in the honor which man renders to his
fellowman? Is it found in high titles, such as Right Honorable Lord
Bishop, his Holiness--the Pope, his Majesty--the King, or Emperor, his
Lordship, etc., etc.? Does happiness seek the mansions of the rich,
the splendid habitations and beautiful parks of the noblemen? Does
happiness seek the companionship of the learned, and select its abode
in academies, colleges and universities? Has the philosopher, the
astronomer, the chemist, the optician, the mathematician, the learned
in any science, sought out its desirable dwelling place? Tell me, ye
swarming millions of bygone generations, who among you were happy? Tell
me, O sons of earth, has happiness been found by mortals? Whither shall
I go for an answer? Let creation speak; let the earth open her mouth
and testify. Listen! What sounds are those I hear? Can it be the low
murmurings of distant thunder? It cannot be! It proceeds as if from the
bowels of the earth! But hark! Did I not hear words, articulated in a
deep, low, mournful sound? Has the earth, indeed, a language? Can she
also express her sorrows? But, listen again! She sighs! She mourns!
She exclaims: "Woe, woe is me, the mother of men! I am pained! I am
weary because of the wickedness of my children! When shall I rest,
and be cleansed from the filthiness which has gone out of me? When
will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a
season abide upon my face?" Who could listen to this sorrowful, painful
lamentation, this earnest, solemn, appeal to the Creator, and not be
moved? Who could reflect upon the bitterness and anguish of our great
common mother, and not weep over the untold miseries she has endured
for six thousand years? Who so dead to sympathy, that he could not join
with an intensity of desire' unutterable, for the emancipation {515} of
the groaning captive? Oh, let the chains of old earth be burst asunder;
let her arise and shake her very foundations; let her put on the
strength and power of her Omnipotent Creator; let her gather the mighty
waters into one place; let her unite the islands and the continents
into one land, into an eternal bond of union; let the everlasting
mountains bow their lofty heads; let the sanctifying fire of the Lord
cleanse corruption from her face; let the redeemed captive smile as at
the creation's morn, and be blessed with the presence of her Creator,
and be crowned with rest--everlasting rest.

But is there no rest for man? Must he seek, and seek in vain for
happiness? Where, Oh, where can the sacred gem be found? Is man forever
doomed to sorrow, lamentation, and ghastly death? Or is there hope?
Shall the sons of mortality appeal to the earth for aid? No, verily no;
she herself has need of aid. Whence, then, shall they look for help?
From heaven! From the high and lofty One who sits upon the throne! From
the Creator, the Redeemer, the great fountain and eternal source of
happiness. To Him, O ye sons of sorrow, direct your cry; to Him lift up
the voice of supplication and fervent prayer; to Him bow your stubborn
hearts, and wills, and yield yourselves to the voice of inspiration, to
the counsel of His messengers; obey the heavenly, angelic message of
the restored Gospel, and you shall be filled with the Holy Ghost--the
Comforter, and be born again into a kingdom of happiness. Let all
who seek for happiness, know assuredly, that this is the only road
that leads to her peaceful abode. Peace is being taken from among the
nations. She has sought out a resting place among the mountains of
Israel, in the new found world. There, and there only will the weary be
at rest, and the sons of sorrow find an heavenly balm for every wound.
There the great Physician will heal the soul, and the body, too. There
the heavens will converse with the sons of earth, and pour down the
rich treasures of wisdom to feast the hungry, longing soul. There the
Lord has commanded the blessing, even life forever more. There, in the
Lord's mountain, will He take away the veil that is over all flesh, and
wipe away the tears of the sorrowful, and impart a fullness of life and
everlasting joy.

{516}



THE STRAIGHT AND NARROW WAY.

DOCTRINES THE SAVIOR TAUGHT.

BY ELDER EPHRAIM H. NYE.

In the meridian of time, the Savior came and dwelt among the children
of men. He was born in a stable and cradled in a manger. The days and
years of His childhood and youth were spent with His parents in the
ordinary walks and vocations of life. Many wonderful things occurred in
relation to His conception and birth: Angelic choirs from the heavens
descended, chanting glad tidings of great joy, peace on earth, good
will toward men. Herod's cunning plans were baffled; his boundless
rage, his cruel edict, the death of the innocents; Joseph's heavenly
warning to flee to Egypt with the young child, his journey and return,
his stay in Galilee that the Scriptures might be fulfilled; all these
dropped out of the public mind, and, as the years rolled by, were
forgotten and lost, except by his relatives and friends.

As He sojourned among men during the years of His youth and early
manhood, there was little in His life to attract the attention of His
fellows until he unostentatiously walked down into the waters of the
river Jordan, and there was baptized by John; and though the Holy Ghost
was seen to rest upon Him in the form of a dove, as He walked out
of the water, and a voice from heaven was heard to say, "This is My
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased;" yet men did not recognize in
Him the Son of God.

Though He preached the gospel of repentance and baptism for the
remission of sins, chose and ordained twelve Apostles and sent them
forth to preach, and went forth healing all manner of sickness and
dire disease, causing the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the lame to
walk and leap for joy, teaching as no other man had taught, healing
as no other man had healed, rebuking as no other man had ever dared
rebuke men for the sins they daily committed, yet they rejected Him and
condemned Him to a cruel death, and though He rose again (which fact
was noised abroad so that all the inhabitants of {517} Jerusalem were
cognizant of it), still they could not see in Him the Savior of the
world.

On the great day of Pentecost, when there were gathered together devout
men of all the surrounding nations, "suddenly there came a sound from
heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where
they were sitting, and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as
of fire, and it sat upon each of them (the Disciples) and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as
the Spirit gave them utterance."

The people of the multitude were all amazed, for they heard of the
wonderful works of God, each in his own tongue. Peter, standing up with
the eleven, lifted up his voice and said unto them: "Ye men of Judea,
and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken
to my words." Then, repeating the words of the Prophet Joel, he showed
to them that Christ should come, and briefly sketched the history of
His life, recounting His wonderful works and noble deeds, showed forth
to the people that they had by cruel hands put Him to death, thus
crucifying the Lord of Glory; that in fulfillment of the Prophet's
words, God had raised Him from the dead; that on the third day He had
been seen by the Apostles and many others with whom He had conversed,
"whereof we are all witnesses. Therefore, being by the right hand of
God exalted, and having received "of the Father the promise of the Holy
Ghost, He hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear." "Therefore,
let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made that same
Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ."

"Now when they heard this they were pricked in their hearts and said
unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what
shall we do?" Not until this moment did they believe in Jesus of
Nazareth as the Savior of the world. Though all His wonderful works had
been performed in their midst, yet not until the story of His life, His
terrible death, His glorious resurrection, and the wonderful outpouring
of the Holy Ghost now manifested before their eyes, did faith spring
up in their hearts, and a desire to be partakers of the heavenly gift,
causing them to plead with the Apostles, "What shall we do?"

FAITH AND WORKS.

Faith is the main-spring of all action, a mighty moving power. By it
Noah, Abraham and Moses performed their {518} wonderful works; the
children of Israel passed through the Red Sea, the walls of Jericho
fell, the harlot Rahab perished not; Gideon, Barak, David and others of
the prophets subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises
and stopped the mouths of lions.

The Apostle Paul understood the wonderful power of faith when he said
(Heb. xi, 6), "But without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he
that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek Him." This verse is self-explanatory. If
we did not believe that God lives and will reward those who diligently
seek Him, we should not seek Him at all. The third verse reads,
"Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word
of God." So then, not only could the wonderful works before recounted
be performed by the old worthies, but even worlds could be framed when
necessary through faith.

But will faith alone accomplish the salvation of the soul of men.
As opinions differ, and he who risks his soul's salvation upon the
uncertainties of men's opinions, has but a vain hope of being led
aright; let the Scriptures answer the question. James 2nd ch. 14-26.
This declaration of the great Apostle seems to set at rest for all time
the theory that faith alone is sufficient to save mankind. In closing
his speech, he very forcibly states that, "As the body without the
spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also." Shall we not say,
then, that works are necessary, and if so, what are those works?

REPENTANCE.

Again let the Scriptures tell the tale. Math. 3, 2d, "In those days
came John the Baptist--saying 'Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is
at hand.'" Jesus came preaching the gospel of the Kingdom of God (Mark
i, 15) "and saying, the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at
hand; repent ye and believe the Gospel." (Mark vi, 12.) "And they (the
Apostles) went out, and preached that men should repent." Jesus was
evidently determined that there should be no mistake upon this matter
when he said (Luke xiii, 3-5): "I tell you Nay; but except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish. Of those eighteen upon whom the tower
of Siloam fell and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above
all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you Nay; but except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish." The word of the Lord to Israel in the
days of Ezekiel was equally positive (Ezek. xviii, 30), "Therefore
{519} I will judge you, O House of Israel, every one according to his
ways, saith the Lord God. Repent and turn yourselves from all your
transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin." Nor does it appear
that conditions had at all changed in the days of the Apostle Paul,
for we find him declaring in the most emphatic terms (Acts xvii, 30),
"And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth
all men everywhere to repent." This, then, is the first grand step of
preparatory work in securing salvation in the Kingdom of God.

But the question may arise in the mind of our reader, Wherein have
I sinned? In what have I done wrong? I have complied with all the
requirements of the decalogue, I have lived according to the golden
rule, doing unto others as I would be done by. What have I to repent
of? Have you not been guilty of following after and believing in
man-made systems of religion and of worshiping in churches erected for
the purpose of making merchandise of the souls of men? Look abroad upon
the face of the earth, search in all the Christian world for the true
Church of Christ as organized and recognized by Him, where do you find
it? Like the shipwrecked mariner whose weary eye scans the vast horizon
with a lingering hope that a friendly sail will come to his relief,
till his heart grows faint and dies within him, so it is with many an
honest soul seeking the way to eternal life, anon as he listens to
the various creeds and examines the doctrines of the different sects,
he discovers discrepancies everywhere. No one has a perfect form of
worship; all have dwindled in unbelief; they have departed from the
faith of the ancients; they have turned away from the true and living
God, as the Apostle Paul said (2nd Tim. iv, 3), "For the time will come
when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts
shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they
shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned into
fables. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.
Preaching for doctrine the precepts of men."

Churches have been erected whose spires rise in every town and city,
village and hamlet over all the land, in which men preach for hire and
divine for money; thus making merchandise of the souls of men, having,
as Isaiah says, "Transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken
the everlasting covenant," and "it shall be as with the people, so
with the priest," and as Jesus said in Luke, "Can the blind lead the
blind? Shall they not both fall into the ditch?" We answer {520} by
saying, as the Apostles of old said: "Repent and be baptized, every
one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins."
(Acts ii, 38.) Yes, for the fruits of repentance are a broken heart and
a contrite spirit; and it is provided that such an one should walk in
the footsteps of Jesus, down into the water, and, like Him, be buried
beneath the liquid wave.

BAPTISM.

This was the first act that Jesus did preparatory to His ministerial
labors, and the very last command He gave to His Apostles prior to His
ascension into heaven (Matt, xxviii, 19-20), "Go ye therefore and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you." And what had He just commanded them?--to baptise
all nations. The next witness testifies a little stronger (Mark xvi,
15-16), "And He said unto them, Go ye into all the world and preach the
Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned."

Oh, what an opportunity to secure eternal life, what a glorious
promise, and this, too, from the Author of our salvation! Many say that
they believe on Him, that they have faith in Him, and yet persistently
refuse to accept the conditions that He has offered for their salvation.

Surely no one will have the audacity to assert that He who gave His
life and shed His blood that we may obtain eternal life, has not
the right to establish the conditions upon which we may secure the
benefits of that atoning blood. His promise is plain, and in language
unmistakable, "He that believes and is baptized shall be saved." Let
us not forget that the declaration is equally positive that, "He that
believeth not shall be damned." Nor is John the Beloved less explicit
in his statement of what the Savior said to Nicodemus (John iii, 5),
"Jesus answered, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born
of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God."
Here is a declaration from the Great Master Himself, that ought to be
a sufficient answer to all who fondly imagine that they can find some
other way.

Again, there are those who believe that if they live a life of honor
and integrity among men, and serve God according to the best light they
have, that they will be entitled to an inheritance in the Kingdom of
God. To all such, let the Scriptures once more declare the fact (Acts
x, 1-6 and 48), "There {521} was a man in Caesarea called Cornelius,
a centurion of the band called the Italian Band, a devout man and one
that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people
and prayed to God always. He saw in a vision, evidently about the ninth
hour of the day, an angel of God coming in to him and saying unto
him--Cornelius; and when he looked on him he was afraid and said, What
is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are come
up for a memorial before God; and now send men to Joppa and call for
one Simon whose surname is Peter; he lodgeth with one Simon, a tanner,
whose house is by the seaside. He shall tell thee what thou oughtest to
do." Ah! Cornelius, you God-fearing, alms-giving, prayerful man, there
is something that you have not done! Though your faith has reached
unto heaven, and your prayers have been heard and your alms-giving
considered by the Almighty, yet there is something for you to do of
such great importance that the windows of heaven were opened and an
angel sent forth unto you as a messenger, to notify you of the fact.
What is it, Cornelius? He sent for Peter, as he was commanded, and when
Peter came, saw his faith, and that of his household, heard their words
and that they believed on the Lord Jesus, "he commanded them to be
baptized." This is the door into the Kingdom of God.

OBJECT OF BAPTISM.

Now there is a great diversity of opinion among men as to the grand
object for which baptism was instituted; some believing that it should
be performed in the presence of a great number of people as a testimony
to them that the humble penitent has put on Christ; others, again,
claiming that it is an "outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace," and still others, that it was intended as a witness
before men of a "change of heart." Not a word can be found in the
Scriptures to support any of these positions, but, on the other hand,
evidence abounds in the sacred record to prove that the ordinance of
baptism was for the purpose of "washing away" or "for the remission of
sins." Let us take the testimony of Mark i, 4, "John did baptize in the
wilderness and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of
sins;" of Luke iii, 3, "And he came into all the country about Jordan,
preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;" Acts
ii, 38, "Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized, every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins."
Also Acts xxii, 16, "And now why tarriest thou? Arise {522} and be
baptized and wash away thy sins." Here the grand question arises: of
what does sin consist? Is it not the violation of law or the breaking
of a command, and is not the sin of omission as great as the sin of
commission? Surely the commandment, "Remember the Sabbath day to keep
it holy," is just as binding as the one that precedes it, "Thou shalt
not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain," yet the failure to obey
the one would be a sin of omission, while to break the other would be
a sin of commission. And are not the commandments issued by the Savior
and His Apostles as much the commands of God as those uttered on Mount
Sinai? And, if so, a failure to comply when "God commands all men
everywhere to repent," as in Acts xvii, 30, or where Peter commanded
them to "repent and be baptized for the remission of sins," as in Acts
ii, 38, brings us under the condemnation of a broken law and adjudges
us as sinners before God.

Having now discovered the door of the straight and narrow way that
leads to eternal life, which door is baptism, and the object of
which is the remission or washing away of our sins, it now becomes
particularly interesting to decide who are proper candidates for
baptism.

SUBJECTS FIT FOR BAPTISM.

Among the various sects and creeds of modern Christendom, many believe
in the practice of baptizing little children. We unhesitatingly say
that no foundation or justification for such a practice can be found
in the Scriptures. It has been shown beyond question, according to
the Scriptures, that baptism is for the remission of sins. Sin is the
breaking of a law or command of God. The child, until it comes to the
years of understanding, is not able to comprehend law or understand the
binding nature of a command; hence it is irresponsible. For where there
is no comprehension there is no law; and where there is no law there
can be no sin; and where there is no sin, baptism is uncalled for and
out of place and is in direct violation of the commands of our Savior.
For if by baptism one child who dies in its infancy may be ushered
into the arms of Jesus, and for the lack of baptism another child
dying in its infancy is forbidden His sacred presence, then is it not
strange that He did not mention this important and essential ordinance
of baptism when He said, as in Mark x, 13-16, "And they brought young
children to Him that He should touch them and His disciples rebuked
those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, He was much displeased
{523} and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto Me,
and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Verily I say
unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little
child, he shall not enter therein. And He took them up in His arms, put
His hands upon them and blessed them."

The testimony of St. Luke is almost identical. It reads as follows
(Luke xviii, 15-17): "And they brought unto Him also infants, that He
should touch them, but when His disciples saw it they rebuked them.
But Jesus called them unto Him, and said, Suffer little children to
come unto me and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God.
Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God
as a little child, shall in no wise enter therein." Clearly, then,
baptism was never intended for little children, for baptism having
been instituted for the purpose of washing away sins, sins already
committed, and the child not having committed any, the ordinance would
not apply. But what is more important, he that believes in and declares
it necessary for the little child to be baptized, and baptizes it, is
committing a most grievous sin in the sight of God; but it is not true,
as claimed by many Christians, that the little infant that dies without
baptism is shut out from the presence of God, that hell is paved with
little unbaptized children, and they are erecting a barrier to those
little infants in the form of the ordinance of baptism and "forbidding"
all such to come unto Christ, thus breaking one of His most emphatic
commands, uttered when "He was much displeased" at what the disciples
were doing, and said, "Forbid them not, but suffer them to come unto
Me."

The little child is pure and innocent because it can commit no sin
until it comes to the years of accountability. Sin, then, conceives
in its heart, and as it grows in years Satan tempts it and it becomes
sinful and wicked, and the means provided by the Almighty to cleanse it
and make it again as pure and as innocent as it was in the beginning
of its mortal career, is the sacred ordinance of baptism. And thus may
the repentant sinner become like the example that Jesus set before
them, as shown by Matt, xviii, 2-4, "And Jesus called a little child
unto Him and set him in the midst of them and said, Verily I say unto
you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall
not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever, therefore, shall
humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the
kingdom of heaven." Thus the little child is given to us as a pattern
of purity, a sample of innocence, by {524} the Savior Himself; and the
bare theory of baptizing such little innocents to wash away their sins
becomes revolting to the human mind when considered under the light of
reason, and the practice of it is an abomination in the sight of God.
Therefore, little children are not eligible for baptism.

This declaration stands out in bold relief when viewed in the light
of the following passages, which plainly prove that all candidates
for the Kingdom of God must be capable of being taught (Matt, xxviii,
13-20): "Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you." All
must have sufficient mental development to be capable of _believing_
the doctrines taught, as shown by the Savior's commandment, and Mark
xvi, 16, "He that _believeth_ and is baptized shall be saved, and he
that _believeth_ not shall be damned." "But when they believed Philip
preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of
Jesus Christ they were baptized, both men and women" (Acts viii, 12).
"And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water, and the
Eunuch said, See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized?
and Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest,
and he answered and said, I _believe_ that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God." (Acts viii, 36-37.)

A knowledge of the divine truths of revealed religion when once
impressed upon the heart, causes faith to spring forth in the soul, and
with admiration we reflect upon the life of Him whose wondrous love was
manifested toward us when He offered His life as a sacrifice for our
sins. By comparison we realize our own unworthiness; that our feet have
strayed from the path of right and that we are steeped in iniquity.

With this conviction comes a resolution to turn, if possible, from our
wicked ways and walk in newness of life. This brings repentance, a
forsaking of sin, a reverence for Almighty God and an earnest desire to
search after and serve Him in spirit and in truth. We resolve to tread
the path in which our Savior walked, down into the waters of baptism,
thus following Him through the door into the Kingdom of God, that where
He is we may be also.

Sufficient mental capacity to be taught, to believe, to repent, and to
voluntarily offer one's self for obedience to the succeeding principle
of the Gospel, is a prerequisite to the ordinance of baptism. Little
children have not this capacity, consequently there is no law of God
requiring them to be baptized; {525} and all man-made systems to the
contrary will be null and void in the day of judgment.

MODE OF BAPTISM.

There are so many conflicting opinions on this question. The orthodox
Christian churches having departed from the faith of the Apostles, and
built up churches to themselves, for the purpose of making merchandise
of the souls of men, have instituted the practice of sprinkling or
pouring, and call it baptism, to support which not one word can be
found in the Holy Writ. The whole tenor of the Scriptures from the time
that John the Baptist came preaching the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins, on through all the writings of the New Testament,
conclusively prove the fact that baptism by immersion was the mode
taught and practiced by Jesus and His Apostles. Jesus, when He was
baptized, "Went up straightway out of the water." When Philip baptized
the Eunuch "They went down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch,
and he baptized him, and when they were come up out of the water," etc.
All this clearly indicates immersion, or why _go down into_ or _come
up out of_ the water? Paul says to the Romans, vi, 4: "Therefore, we
are buried with Him by baptism into death," 5th, "For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death," certainly there is
nothing in a sprinkling or a pouring that represents either a burial or
a planting, but each of these passages point in unmistakable terms to
a baptism by immersion. The Apostle Paul again makes this clear in his
Epistle to the Colossians, ii, 12: "Buried with Him in baptism." When
John baptized in the wilderness, "There went out unto him all the land
of Judea and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the
river of Jordan, confessing their sins." (Mark i, 5.)

All the evidence contained in the sacred Scriptures points unmistakably
to the fact that immersion was the only mode of baptism practiced by
the Apostles and early Christians. Profane history gives conclusive
evidence of this fact. Speaking of baptism of the first century, Dr.
Mosheim says, "In this century baptism was administered in convenient
places within the public assemblies, and by immersing the candidate
wholly in water." (Mosheim's Church History [Murdock], Third Edition,
Vol. 1, p. 87.) Of the second century, the same great author says:
"Twice a year, namely, at Easter and Whitsuntide, * * * baptism was
administered by the Bishop or by the Presbyters (Elders) acting by his
command and authority. {526} The candidates for it were immersed wholly
in water with the invocation of the sacred Trinity, according to the
Savior's precept."

Indeed, the first deviation from baptizing by immersion occurs in
a case recorded by Eusebius, as happening in the third century.
He alludes to it in these detracting terms: "He (Novatian) fell
into a grievous distemper, and it being supposed that he would die
immediately, he received baptism (being sprinkled with water) on the
bed where he lay (if that can be termed baptism), neither when he had
escaped that sickness, did he afterwards receive the other things which
the canon of the church enjoined should be received." (Ecclesiastical
History, Eusebius, p. 113.) Even down to the close of the thirteenth
century baptism by immersion was the rule, and sprinkling and pouring
the exception. Yet the innovation thus made in the third century has
worked its insidious way among the various divisions of Christianity
until today a convert can have any kind of baptism he may desire; thus
have they departed from the faith of the Apostles and are teaching
for religion the commandments of men, having "Transgressed the laws,
changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant," in fulfilment
of the words of the prophet Isaiah. (Isaiah xxiv, 5.)

GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST.

The next step in the regular order of initiation into the fold of
Christ is to secure the birth of the Spirit, or the baptism of the Holy
Ghost; this being essential to enable us to pursue an acceptable course
in the service of the Lord, that the Holy Ghost may be with us as an
abiding gift, as a light to our feet and a lamp to our pathway through
life. The Lord in His wonderful plan for the salvation of the souls of
men has provided a way for the humble and penitent baptized believer
to secure this blessed gift. (Mark i, 8.) "I indeed have baptized you
with water, but He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost." (Acts i,
5.) "For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with
the Holy Ghost not many days hence." Behold the promise fulfilled.
(Acts ii, 2-4.) "And suddenly there came a sound from Heaven as of
a rushing mighty wind and it filled all the house where they were
sitting, and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire,
and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them
utterance." But this precious gift was not to be given until after
Jesus was glorified, as shown by {527} the following (John vii, 39),
"* * * For the Holy Ghost was not yet given because that Jesus was
not yet glorified." On that great Pentecostal day the Holy Ghost was
given and a glorious manifestation of heavenly light appeared sitting
upon each of the Apostles who had accompanied the Savior in all His
travels and had witnessed His wonderful works, and by His divine favor
had been made partakers of His holy ministry. They now received the
promised blessing in rich abundance, and a way was provided by which
they might transmit it to others by the imposition of hands, as shown
by the following (Acts viii, 17): "Then laid they their hands on them
and they received the Holy Ghost." Evidently the Holy Ghost came not as
the result of the baptism, nor in answer to the prayer of the Apostles,
but by the laying on of their hands, clearly showing that this was the
mode the Lord had provided by which the Holy Ghost should be conferred
upon baptized believers. This again is clearly set forth in Acts xix,
5-6, "When they heard this they were baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came
on them, and they spake with tongues and prophesied."

THE BLOOD OF CHRIST.

We have now pointed out the path that leads to eternal life--the
straight and narrow way, and carefully noted the inscriptions along
the line, down into the water through the door into the Kingdom of
God. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance of all sins, baptism
by immersion for the remission of sins, gift of the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of hands; this is the course marked out by the Father to
prepare His children to receive the benefits of the atoning blood of
Jesus Christ.

Earthly things are typical of heavenly things as set forth in the
following (1 John v, 7-8): "For there are three that bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one; and there are three that bear witness in the earth, the Spirit,
the water and the blood, and these three agree in one." By the water we
keep the commandment, by the Spirit are we justified, and by the blood
are we sanctified; and thus we become saints. He who has fully repented
of his sins and been baptized for the remission thereof, and received
the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, may then partake of the
emblems of the Savior's flesh and blood; and in that sacred ordinance
eat and drink to his soul, {528} the benefits of that atoning blood.
And such have the promise of the Savior that they shall never hunger
nor thirst. There is no other way provided on earth by which mankind
can secure the benefits of the atoning blood of Christ.

AUTHORITY.

Upon this question hinges the validity of all the acts of men. Every
officer of our government must be elected or appointed according to
the mode established by the Constitution of the United States, or his
acts fall to the ground as null and void. The decisions of a court
involving the validity of titles to land or other great interests would
be void if it could be shown that the judge rendering the decisions
had not been elected or appointed legally. Every deed issued by a
sheriff at a sheriff's sale of real estate would be void if it could
be shown that the sheriff was a usurper and not legally authorized
to officiate in the duties of the office. All naturalization papers
issued by a judge, if it could be shown that he had never been elected
or appointed according to the constitutional requirements, would by a
legal tribunal be declared worthless and the holder deprived of his
citizenship. In fact, the question of authority to act in any office of
the affairs of human life is so clearly understood by all persons of
ordinary intelligence that time would seem to be wasted in discussing
it; but not so in questions involving the future of the human soul.
In these sacred and vastly more important matters upon which hang all
our hopes of eternal life, the average man seems willing to trust to
the opinions of a minister of some one of the orthodox sects or to the
wild vagaries of an upstart who cries, "Lo, here is Christ, or "Lo,
He is there," without for a single moment raising the question, Where
is his authority to officiate in the sacred ordinances of the Gospel
of Christ, or to initiate men into the Kingdom of God? The average
merchant in conducting his regular business, when waited upon by one
claiming to be an agent of a manufacturer, places his order with that
agent fully expecting to receive the goods. As the time rolls on the
goods come according to the sample shown and the order given. This fact
alone is proof to the merchant that the agent was in touch with his
principal and was a duly authorized agent. But if the goods come not,
it is strong presumptive evidence that the agent was a fraud and was
not authorized by the manufacturer to take orders for goods. If this
test be applied to the ministers of the various sects of the Christian
world, it will at once be found that they are self-appointed {529}
agents, not in touch with the principal whom they claim to represent,
as their patrons receive not the goods. In other words, the signs
promised by the Savior are lacking and do not follow the believer,
which alone is sufficient evidence that the so-called ministers were
never sent of God.

Jesus said, "Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every
creature, he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that
believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that
believe; in My name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with
new tongues, they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly
thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and
they shall recover." (Mark xvi, 15-18.) The promised blessings fail,
the signs do not follow, they receive not the goods. The grand secret
of it all is, God has not sent the agents through whom they seek these
blessings; they hold no authority to officiate in the ordinances of
His house; as agents they are not in touch with their principal. These
ministers are self-appointed teachers of man-made systems of religion.
They are teaching for doctrine the commandments of men.

From the time the Christian Fathers fell by persecution and death,
down to the time the Emperor Constantine made the Christian faith
universal through the Roman provinces in 323 A.D., the forms of the
Christian religion were constantly undergoing a change. At that time
there were incorporated in the Christian church heathen rites, which
with the innovations added, down through the ages to the present time,
stamps that church today as one entirely separate and apart from the
original apostolic church. Without Apostles and Prophets through whom
they might obtain the word of God, the church has steadily drifted
from its moorings into the broad sea of men's opinions, until it is
split and divided into hundreds of different sects and creeds, no one
of which can today present an organization that even resembles the
form of the Church of Christ. The most important features have been
eliminated. Signs and wonders and miraculous gifts, together with the
fruits of the Spirit, set forth by the Apostle Paul in I Cor. xii, have
disappeared, and but the empty and powerless form is found among the
children of men. The shadow alone remains, the substance has departed.
And why? Because mankind have departed from the faith of the ancients.
The rights, powers and privileges of the apostolic priesthood have long
since been withdrawn from man, and all who officiate in religious rites
do so without authority from the living God.

If we examine and see how the servants of God were called {530} to
the ministry in other ages, we can discover a guide to direct us in
obtaining authority in this age. From out of the midst of the burning
bush the Lord called Moses (Ex. iii), and when he (Moses) was about to
be succeeded by Joshua as leader, he conferred upon Joshua authority by
the laying on of his hands. (See Deut. xxxiv, 9.) "And Joshua, the son
of Nun, was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands
upon him." Jesus, when He entered upon His ministry, called twelve
men and ordained them; "And He ordained twelve men that they should
be with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach." (Mark iii,
14.) Again He said, "Ye have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you and
ordained you." (John xv, 16.) Jesus said in His prayer unto His Father,
"As thou hast sent Me into the world even so have I sent them into the
world." (John xvii, 18.)

The Apostle Paul evidently had this question of authority to meet
as he gave vent to his feelings in the following forcible language:
"Whereunto I am ordained a preacher and an Apostle (I speak the truth
in Christ and lie not), a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity."
(I Tim. ii, 7.) It was very gratifying, no doubt, to the Apostle Paul,
to be able to declare with such emphasis the fact of his ordination;
and no wonder, when we consider the way in which he was called. He was
justly entitled to declare it, as will be seen by the manner of his
calling. "As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost
said: Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have
called them. And when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands
on them, they sent them away, so they being sent forth by the Holy
Ghost," etc. (Acts xiii, 2-4.) Paul then was evidently called by direct
revelation of the Holy Ghost, and when the hands of the Prophets were
laid upon him, he was sent away, so also was his companion, Barnabas.

The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews makes a most positive
declaration on this question. He says: "For every High Priest taken
from among men is ordained for men, in things pertaining to God, that
he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins; and no man taketh this
honor to himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron." (Heb. v,
1, 4.) A glance at Exodus iv, 14-16 and 27-28, will show us how Aaron
was called: "And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and
He said: Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak
well, and also behold he cometh forth to meet thee, and when he seeth
thee he will be glad in his heart. And thou shalt speak unto him and
put {531} words into his mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, and with
his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do; and he shall be thy
spokesman unto the people." Thus Aaron was called of God; and in all
ages when God has had a people on the earth, His servants have been
duly called of Him and ordained, and the stamp of His approval has been
placed on their labors in signs and miraculous manifestations.

SALVATION FOR THE DEAD.

In this age of religious freedom, when every man is at liberty to
worship how, where or what he pleases, when the Christian church is
split and divided into innumerable sects and creeds, and is still
dividing and subdividing; where the opinions of men, crystallized
into creeds, pass current as systems of theological truths; while
spiritualism in all its various forms is rampant upon the earth, and
its younger and more delicately molded brother, theosophy, is gaining
acceptance as a wonderful revelation from the unseen world; while
darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the people, and men are
continually seeking for that which borders upon the sensational--the
word of God comes forth proclaiming the principles of salvation for the
dead as well as for the living.

That there is but one faith, one hope, one baptism, one way to obtain
eternal life, either for the living or for the dead, is clearly shown
by the Scriptures. "To the law and to the testimony; if they speak
not according to the word, it is because there is no light in them."
(Isaiah viii, 20.) These shall be our guide. By this divine method we
are willing that all shall be judged. Opinions of men are not the words
of God, nor is the word of God to receive a private interpretation,
as is clearly shown by the following (II Peter i, 20, 21): "Knowing
this first that no prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private
interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of
man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost."
Opinions of men shall not prevail, but we will take the word of God for
our guide. "And when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have
familiar spirits and unto wizards that peep and that mutter, should not
a people seek unto their God for the living to the dead?" (Isaiah viii,
19.) Let us then go to the Scriptures, and seek the word of God for a
knowledge of the dead.

After Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, fulfilled His mission
among the living and was about to depart to the unseen world and
perform His work for the salvation of the dead: {532} while He was
suffering the pangs of death upon the cross between two malefactors, He
was railed upon by one, yet worshipped by the other, to whom He said:
"Today shalt thou be with Me in Paradise." This saying has created a
belief in the Christian world that the vilest sinner on his death-bed
or the murderer upon the gallows by confessing Christ at the last
moment, can be saved. But let us find out where the Savior went. Did He
go to His Father and God? Not if the Scriptures are true.

On the morning of the Savior's resurrection and Mary's visit to the
sepulcher, she thought Jesus was the gardener. Yet when He said
"Mary," she at once recognized Him, and in her joy evidently sought
to embrace Him, for it is said, "Jesus saith unto her, touch Me not,
for I am not yet ascended to My Father; but go to My brethren and say
unto them, I ascend unto My Father and your Father, and to My God and
your God." (John xx, 17.) If this be true, are we not justified in
asking the question, "Lord, if Thou hast not been to Thy Father and
God during these three days, where hast Thou been?" Let the Scriptures
answer: "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for
the unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit by which also He went and preached
unto the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient when once
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah while the ark was
preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water." (I
Peter iii, 18-20.) So then Christ went to the spirit world, and there
preached the Gospel to the spirits in prison. And why? "For, for this
cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they
might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to
God in the Spirit." (I Peter iv, 6.) It would seem that this can need
no explanation, for by this rule all men are to be judged by the same
law, whether they hear the Gospel in life or after death. And herein is
the justice of Almighty God made manifest, for if it were not so, and
if the modern Christian theory should prevail, viz., that all mankind
who do not confess Christ are lost, what shall be said of four-fifths
of the people on the earth today, and those that have lived in like
circumstances in the heathen world, who never heard of Christ?

If, when all mankind are brought before the judgment-seat to be
judged, and the heathen hears his sentence read by the great Judge,
"Depart from Me, ye cursed, into the place prepared for the devil and
his angels, because you never confessed {533} My name," would not
the heathen be justified in saying, "Who art thou? I never heard of
Jesus Christ. When I was on the earth I worshipped Joss and served him
faithfully."

To punish the heathen for not confessing Christ when in fact he never
heard of Him is contrary to the justice of an All-wise Creator. But God
has provided a better way. All who have never heard the Gospel in life
will have an opportunity after death, as clearly set forth in the above
as in the following: "Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live." "But," says the objector, "that means all
they that are dead in sin," but read a little farther: "Marvel not at
this, for the hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear His voice." (John v, 25 and 28.) Again, "For as Jonas was
three days and nights in the whale's belly, so shall the Son of Man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth." (Matt, xii,
40.) By these passages it is clearly apparent that the Savior fore-knew
His mission to the spirit world in the heart of the earth, and that
while there, all who were in their graves would hear His voice.

Not only was this understood by Jesus and His Apostles, but long prior
to the Savior's day the Prophets foresaw the work He would do for the
dead, "I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold
thine hand and will keep thee, and give thee a covenant of the people,
for a light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
prison house." (Isaiah xlii, 6-7.) Here the prophet foretold the labors
of the Savior. During His sojourn in the flesh, we have no account of
His having brought out the prisoners from the prison, or proclaiming
liberty to the captives, or the opening of the prison to them that
are bound. Had He done so, the Roman government would have had a case
against Him, yet Pilate found no fault in Him. Hence we must look
elsewhere for the fulfilment of these passages.

"And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall punish the
host of the high ones that are on high and the kings of the earth
upon the earth, and they shall be gathered together as prisoners are
gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many
days shall they be visited." (Isaiah xxiv, 21-2.) Here is the finale of
a terrible picture of the earth's desolation, when it is to be empty,
turned upside down, broken, dissolved, removed like a cottage, and the
inhabitants thereof scattered. All are to be gathered, including the
kings, {534} and the high ones, as prisoners are gathered in the pit,
shut up in prison and after many days visited. What will be the object
of this visitation? Peter has already told it: as Christ visited the
antediluvians, so when these have suffered the vengeance of Almighty
God in the spirit, some of His servants, ministering angels, will be
sent to visit them and preach the Gospel to them as Jesus did.

"Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting
doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. Who is the King of Glory?
The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle." (Psalm xxiv,
7-8.) What was the subject of the vision thus portrayed by the prophet,
and where was it to take place? He saw the Savior making His triumphal
entry into the infernal regions, and with irresistible power the gate
and doors are made to fly open and the immortal King stands in the
midst of prisoners of the spirit world. Thus the full import of that
beautiful passage of the psalmist David would read: "Lift up your
heads, O ye gates of hell, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors of
the prisons of the damned, and the King of Glory shall come into the
regions of darkness proclaiming liberty to the captives and the opening
of the prison doors to them that are bound in hell."

If the antediluvians after their long sojourn in the regions of
darkness were had in remembrance before God so that He sent His beloved
Son to preach to them the Gospel during the time His body lay in the
tomb, what shall be done for those who have died since the Savior's
visit to the spirit world? As His Apostles and all His faithful
followers served Him in life, who shall say that after death they will
not follow His example, and continue to serve Him by going to the
spirit world and there preaching to the spirits in prison who have
died without a knowledge of the Gospel? And when these poor benighted
beings, after their long captivity under the reign of Lucifer, listen
to the precious truths of the Gospel of Christ and become converted,
straightway the question arises, How can I obey the ordinance of
baptism? I am in a disembodied state of existence, yet my Savior has
said: "Except ye are born of water and of the Spirit, ye cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God." Oh, wonderful plan provided by the Almighty!
The living may be baptized for the dead. It is very plain that this
great principle was understood by the ancient Saints, as will be seen
by the words of the Apostle Paul, addressed to the Corinthians: "Else
what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead arise
not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead?" (I Cor. xv, 29.)

{535}



A MOTHER'S INFLUENCE.

A FEW WORDS ABOUT THE FIELDINGS AND THE BIRTH OF PRESIDENT JOSEPH F.
SMITH.

John Fielding and his wife, Rachel, were natives of Yorkshire,
England, having been born in 1759 and 1768, respectively. They were
married at that place, and afterwards moved to Bedfordshire, where
they lived together for forty years in the humble and happy sphere of
farm life. They were both devoted Methodists, Mr. Fielding having the
distinction of being a local preacher, in which capacity he labored
most faithfully, often riding from ten to thirty miles to fill his
appointments, but never accepting a penny for his work from the society
which voted to compensate him for his services. Together with his
faithful wife, he lived a life of industry, sobriety and integrity
before men, fearing God and keeping His commandments to the best of
his knowledge with all the sincerity and humility of his soul. Nine
children were born of this union, among whom were Joseph and Mary, whom
we wish on this occasion particularly to single out in our sketch. The
mother died in 1828, and in 1832 young Joseph left his nativity to go
to America to prepare the way for the rest of the family to follow. He
located in upper Canada, being subsequently joined by the members of
his family from England, his two sisters among them, who, together with
himself, and also other progressive spirits of the village, applied
themselves closely to the Scriptures. A little body of seekers after
truth was organized, in which was found John Taylor, who afterwards
became president of the Church. The Society met several times a week in
company with a Methodist preacher, to study the different religions,
and to pray for the Lord to send them the Holy Ghost; for through their
research they had been led to believe many of the principles of the
Gospel contrary to the orthodox dogmas of the times. It was during this
time that Apostle Parley P. Pratt went on his mission to Canada, and
was directed to the home of Brother Taylor. {535} He was admitted into
the association of investigators, and as a result Joseph Fielding, his
two sisters and his family, and also John Taylor accepted the Gospel
and subsequently moved to Kirtland. The Methodist minister being chided
by his members, rejected the truth and became a persecutor of the
Saints.

In 1837 the wife of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith died, leaving him with
six small children. Later he married again, taking to wife Mary
Fielding, one of Joseph Fielding's sisters, who had embraced the Gospel
in Canada through the labors of Apostle Pratt.

In June, 1837, in company with Apostles Heber C. Kimball and Willard
Richards, Joseph Fielding left Kirtland to open up the Gospel in
England, being joined at New York by three other missionaries. Brother
Fielding remained on his mission four years, during which time
approximately 7,000 souls accepted the truth. It was while he was in
England that he received the following letter from his sister Mary,
whom it will be remembered was the wife of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith,
in which she tells of the birth of her "dear little Joseph F.," as
the devoted mother expressed it, who is now our worthy and honored
president of the Church, the letter "F" being the initial of the
surname of his uncle, Joseph Fielding. The letter is as follows:

    "Commerce, Illinois, N. America, June, 1839.

    "My Very Dear Brother--As the elders are expecting shortly to take
    their leave of us again to preach the Gospel in my native land, I
    feel as though I would not let the opportunity of writing you pass
    by unimproved. I believe it will give you pleasure to hear from us
    by our own hand; notwithstanding, you will see the brethren face to
    face, and have an opportunity of hearing all particulars respecting
    us and our families, from their mouths.

    "As it respects myself, it is now so long since I wrote to you,
    and so many important things have transpired, and so great have
    been my afflictions, etc., that I know not where to begin; but I
    can say, hitherto has the Lord preserved me, and I am still the
    living to praise Him, as I do this day. I have, to be sure, been
    called to drink deep of the bitter cup; but you know, my beloved
    brother, this makes the sweet the sweeter. I feel at this moment,
    while reflecting on the events of the past seven months, so full
    of matter, that I am ready to wish I could convey myself into your
    presence for a short time, so that I might communicate verbally
    more than I can possibly do by the pen.

    "You have, I suppose, heard of the imprisonment of my dear husband,
    with his brother Joseph, Elder Rigdon, and others, who were kept
    from us nearly six months; and I suppose no one felt the painful
    effects of their confinement more than myself. I was left in a
    way that called for the exercise of all the courage and grace I
    possessed. My {537} husband was taken from me by an armed force, at
    a time when I needed, in a particular manner, the kindest care and
    attention of such a friend, instead of which, the care of a large
    family was suddenly and unexpectedly left upon myself, and, in a
    few days after, my dear little Joseph F. was added to the number.
    Shortly after his birth I took a severe cold, which brought on
    chills and fever; this, together with the anxiety of mind I had
    to endure, threatened to bring me to the gates of death. I was at
    least four months entirely unable to take any care either of myself
    or child; but the Lord was merciful in so ordering things that
    my dear sister could be with me all the time. Her child was five
    months old when mine was born; so she had strength given her to
    nurse them both, so as to have them do well and grow fast.

    "You will also have heard of our being driven, as a people, from
    the state and from our homes; but you will hear all particulars
    from the elders, so as to render it not necessary for me to write
    them. This happened during my sickness, and I had to be removed
    more than two hundred miles, chiefly on my bed. I suffered much on
    my journey; but in three or four weeks after we got into Illinois,
    I began to amend, and my health is now as good as ever it was. It
    is now little more than a month since the Lord, in His marvellous
    power, returned my dear husband, with the rest of the brethren, to
    their families, in tolerable health. We are now living in Commerce,
    on the bank of the great Mississippi river. The situation is very
    pleasant; you would be much pleased to see it. How long we may be
    permitted to enjoy it I know not; but the Lord knows best what is
    best for us. I feel but little concerned about where I am, if I
    can but keep my mind staid upon God; for, you know in this there
    is perfect peace. I believe the Lord is overruling all things for
    our good. I suppose our enemies look upon us with astonishment and
    disappointment.

    "I greatly desire to see you, and I think you would be pleased to
    see our little ones: will you pray for us, that we may have grace
    to train them up in the way they should go, so that they may be a
    blessing to us and the world. I have a hope that our brothers and
    sisters will also embrace the fullness of the Gospel, and come into
    the new and everlasting covenant; I trust that their prejudices
    will give way to the power of truth. I would gladly have them
    with us here, even though they might have to endure all kind of
    tribulation and affliction with us and the rest of the children of
    God, in these last days, so that they might share in the glories
    of the Celestial Kingdom. As to myself, I can truly say that I
    would not give up the prospects of the latter-day glory for all
    that glitters in this world. O! my dear brother, I must tell you
    for your comfort, that my hope is full, and it is a glorious hope;
    and though I have been left for near six months, in widowhood, in
    the time of great affliction, and was called to take, joyfully or
    otherwise, the spoiling of almost all our goods, in the absence of
    my husband, and all unlawfully, just for the Gospel's sake (for
    the judge himself declared that he was kept in prison for no other
    reason than because he was a friend to his brother), yet I do not
    feel the least discouraged: no, though my sister and I are here
    together in a strange land, we have been enabled to rejoice in the
    midst of our privation and persecutions that we were counted worthy
    to suffer these things, so that we may, with the ancient Saints who
    suffered in the like manner, inherit the same glorious reward. If
    it had not been for this hope, I should have sunk before this; but,
    blessed be the God {538} and Rock of my salvation, here I am, and
    am perfectly satisfied and happy, having not the smallest desire to
    go one step backward.

    "Your last letter to Elder Kimball gave us great pleasure; we thank
    you for your expression of kindness, and pray God to bless you
    according to your desires for us.

    "The more I see of the dealings of our Heavenly Father with us as
    a people, the more I am constrained to rejoice that I was made
    acquainted with the everlasting covenant. O may the Lord keep me
    faithful till my change comes! I desire that you would write us,
    and let us know all particulars that would be interesting to us.
    O, my dear brother, why is it that our friends should stand out
    against the truth, and look on those that would show it to them as
    their enemies? The work here is prospering much; several men of
    respectability and intelligence, who have been acquainted with all
    our difficulties, are coming into the work.

    "Sister Mary will also write to you. My husband joins me in love to
    you. I remain, my dear brother and sister, your affectionate sister.

    "Mary Smith."

From the spirit of and the facts presented in the above communication
one is able to see, not only the noble spirit and sterling character
of that devoted and self-sacrificing mother and faithful wife, but he
is also brought face to face with the truth too often concealed from
deserving recognition, that within the ranks of God's soldiery there
are none more valiant, none more brave, none more heroic; yea, none who
endure more of the heat and brunt of the battle than do the courageous
and loyal-hearted wives and mothers who remain at home alone to cope
with the serious problems of life and to bear the responsibility of
the family while the husband is abroad in the ministry. And when we
understand this, and recognize, too, that every true and faithful wife
and mother realizes the importance and the magnitude of her mission,
then can we appreciate more fully the tenderness and sincerity of
heart, the purity and nobility of soul revealed in woman--God's
masterpiece of creation--as expressed in the exalting and pathetic
appeal of Sister Smith to her brother Joseph, "I think you would be
pleased to see our little ones. Will you pray for us, that we may have
grace to train them up in the way they should go, so that they may be a
blessing to us and the world?"

This noble mother stayed with the body of the Church, remaining loyal
and true to its leaders, and firm and steadfast in the faith, and
taught her children to follow in her footsteps. With the rest of the
Saints, who were driven from their homes by cruel mobs incited by
bitter apostates, and other despisers of the truth, she took her little
family to the valleys {539} of the mountains--her son Joseph, although
less than ten years of age, driving two yoke of oxen and a heavy wagon
across the plains, a distance of one thousand miles.

Sister Smith devoted the few short years of her eventful life to the
culture and training of her children, inculcating within their minds
the necessity of their clinging to the faith and remaining loyal to
the cause of God; and although she was taken away in the fall of 1852,
yet she had implanted within the breasts of her children a thorough
knowledge that the Church had been restored and perfectly organized
with apostles and prophets, with a decree from God that it should stand
forever and never be disorganized or thrown down, and with a love so
strong for the truth that their lives and characters stand out before
the world and before God as a monument for integrity, fidelity and
obedience, whose every surface, polished as bright as the noon-day sun
by the faith, the prayers and the tears of that loving and devoted
mother, reflects honor and glory on her sacred name that will endure
forever. What a contrast between the fruits of the influence exerted
by this true daughter of God upon her husband's children, one of whom
is the patriarch and the other the president of the Church of Christ
on the earth today, and that exercised by other mothers who have
instilled within the hearts of their children the spirit of dissension
and rebellion against the stability of the restored Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ!

    "_The devil has put the whole world on the watch against us. It
    is impossible for us to make the least move without exciting, if
    not all the world, at least a considerable portion of it. They are
    excited at what we do, and, strange to relate, they are no less
    excited at what we do not do_!"

    --_Brigham Young_.

{540}



IS BAPTISM ESSENTIAL TO SALVATION?

This is a question of grave importance, because it involves me fate of
every man and woman in the world. The minds of many have been troubled
on this point, and none should rest satisfied until they have a perfect
understanding in regard to it.

There is considerable discussion and diversity of opinions on this
subject in the so-called Christian world; and it seems that all that
has been said about it by uninspired men has only tended to bewilder
the mind. But while they cling to their own opinions and wander from
the truth, we much prefer believing the revealed word of God.

In Luke (_vii. 29, 30_) we read that John the Baptist, a servant of
the Most High, taught baptism, and those who were baptized justified
God, while some "rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being
not baptized of him." No one will dare to say that men will be saved
in rejecting the counsel of God against themselves. Then, as it is a
counsel of God for men to be baptized, they cannot be saved without it;
therefore, it is essential to salvation.

The Lord sent his angel to Cornelius, and told him to send for Peter,
who would tell him words by which he and all his house should be saved
(_Acts x. 14_). Cornelius did so, and when Peter came, "he commanded
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord" (Acts x. 48). If Cornelius
had rejected baptism as non-essential, could he have been saved? No;
for the angel told him that Peter would tell him _how_ to be saved, and
Peter "commanded them to be baptized." According to this, baptism must
be essential to salvation.

Paul, speaking to the Galatians, says: "Ye are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been _baptized
into Christ have put on Christ_" (_Gal. iii. 26, 27_). If it is
essential to "put on Christ" to obtain salvation, then it is essential
to be baptized, for we put on Christ by baptism.

Jesus, in giving the apostles their commission, said: "Go ye into all
the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believeth
and is baptized shall be saved; but he that {541} believeth not," (and
consequently is not baptized) "shall be damned" (_Mark xvi. 15, 16_).
Here the Savior positively declares that it is the baptized believer
who shall be saved. Then, of course, baptism is essential to salvation,
and who will dare to say it is not.

Jesus said to Nicodemus: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man
be _born of water_" (that is, baptized in water) "and of the spirit,"
(that is, baptized in the spirit) "he _cannot_ enter into the kingdom
of God." (_John iii. 6_). If entering the kingdom of God is essential
to salvation, then being "born of water," or, in other words, being
baptized, is essential also, for by one we enter the other.

The Apostle Peter, in the third chapter of his first epistle, says,
that in the ark there were eight souls "saved by water, the like figure
whereunto even _baptism_ doth also now save us." According to this, he
taught that baptism was essential to salvation.

On the day of Pentecost, many persons were convinced that Jesus was the
Christ, which caused them to inquire of God's servants what they should
do, to which Peter replied: "Repent and be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins" (_Acts ii. 38_). If
baptism was not essential to salvation, why did Peter command them to
be baptized?

When John was in the wilderness he preached "baptism of repentance for
the _remission of sins_" (_Mark i. 4_). He preached the same doctrine
in all the country about Jordan (_Luke iii. 3_). Peter commanded the
people to be baptized "for the remission of sins" (_Acts ii. 38_).
Ananias said to Paul, "why tarriest thou? Arise and be baptized and
_wash away thy sins_" (_Acts xxii. 16_). From these quotations we learn
that baptism is "for the remission of sins." Is the remission of sins
essential to salvation? If so, baptism must be, for one is obtained
through the other.

It is repeatedly stated in the scriptures that it is they who _do the
will_ of God that will enter the kingdom of heaven. That it is the will
of God for people to be baptized, no reasonable person will deny. Then,
they who say "Lord, Lord," and reject baptism, will surely receive that
woeful doom, "depart ye cursed! I never knew you."

The apostles spoke by the authority that God had given them. What they
told the people, while in the line of their duty was as binding on them
as though the Lord had done it himself. Their words were the words of
God. And when {542} they commanded the people to be baptized they must
comply or lose salvation, for no one can be saved in disobeying God's
commandments.

If baptism is not essential to salvation, why does the Lord require it?
The fact that He requires it, is enough to prove that it is essential.

Some have supposed that the thief who was crucified beside the Savior
went to heaven, and it is believed that he was not baptized; therefore,
it is argued if one can be saved without baptism others can, and
consequently it is not essential to salvation. But this supposition is
not true, for Jesus said to the thief, "_to-day_ shalt thou be with me
in Paradise," and three days afterwards said to Mary, "touch me not for
_I have not yet ascended unto my Father_." According to this, Paradise
and Heaven are two distinct places, and as Jesus did not go to Heaven,
neither did the thief; for they were both together in Paradise.

"If it is necessary for every one to be baptized," asks one, "what will
become of the good people who have died without having that privilege?"

To this we may reply that the dead who died without hearing the gospel
will have it preached to them as it was anciently, (_I Peter iv. 5,
6_). They who obey it will be saved but they who reject it will be
condemned, as though they were in the flesh.

"But," says one, "a dead person, cannot be baptized." Very true; but
God in His infinite wisdom provided a way in which the dead can be
baptized for, by proxy, as shown by Paul in the questions (_I Cor. xv.
29_): "Else what shall they do who are _baptized_ for the _dead_, if
the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?"

Paul was not speaking about _baptism_ for the dead, but the
_resurrection_ of the dead, and brings up baptism for the dead as a
_proof_ of the resurrection, by asking why they were "baptized for the
dead if the dead rise not at all." But this plainly shows that "baptism
for the dead" was both believed and practiced by the early Christians.

Enough has now been said to prove to any reasonable person that baptism
is essential to salvation, and the arguments against such a doctrine
have been sufficiently refuted. So, let all people prepare themselves
and be baptized, under proper authority, for the remission of sins,
that they may be saved in the kingdom of God; for what shall it profit
a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul.

{543}



ALLEGED "OBJECTIONABLE FEATURES" IN THE RELIGION OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

BY ELDER CHARLES W. STAYNER.

THE BOOK OF MORMON. One of the reasons for non-belief presented
by those who do not obey the Gospel revealed in our day, is that our
religion has "objectionable features;" and some who have acquired
information concerning the industrious and thrifty character of the
Latter-day Saints, and their prosperous condition in Utah, carry the
idea that were it not for its "objectionable features," "Mormonism," as
it is called, might engage their attention, and that its claims would
be more readily entertained by the intelligent classes. One of these
"objectionable features" is, that we believe in and publish a record
called the Book of Mormon, which has been falsely styled the "Mormon
Bible," and through which the Saints have received from their enemies
the name of "Mormons." This book, instead of being a substitute for
the Scriptures, as is very incorrectly stated, is a record translated
from ancient plates, found in the earth on the American Continent.
The record gives most valuable information concerning the origin of
the American Indians, a subject which has furnished a theme for much
conjecture among the learned during the present century, and on which
they are still endeavoring to discover sources of information.

Notwithstanding the desire to ascertain the very historical data which
the work contains, the Book of Mormon has not received much of their
attention; and this reticence is the more remarkable from the fact that
scarcely a year passes without the publication of some newly-discovered
evidence, testifying in a most telling manner to the truth of the
account given in the record. Items of information are in quick
succession being obtained and brought to their notice, which have been
before {544} the world for about fifty years, in the record of which we
are speaking.

The vast discoveries in Central America made by Messrs. Stephens and
Catherwood, show conclusively the statements in the Book of Mormon to
be correct; and these evidences are materially increased in various
ways through the diligent researches of other discoverers, as shown
in an article by Apostle Moses Thatcher, lately published in serial
form in the Millennial Star. Speculations concerning the aborigines
of that continent have furnished matter for volumes upon volumes, and
the discovery of a skeleton or the finding of a stone has been dilated
upon with zeal, and supplied conceded proof of a multiplicity of these
theories and ideas, tending to show that the ancient inhabitants were a
civilized race.

But here is a work translated from the actual record of those people,
written by themselves when in their strength, and engraved on plates of
curious and ancient workmanship, giving a lucid and narrative account
of their settlement and social and religious progress, and hid away in
the earth by the inspired historian for some fourteen centuries, and
whose statements are sustained by undeniable proofs of a very striking
character; and yet the work is comparatively ignored, and the facts
therein given sought with avidity from other and less authoritative
sources.

The reader would naturally inquire, what is the cause of this? Simply
because the Book of Mormon has in their estimation an "objectionable
feature." Its discovery was brought about by a _revelation from
Heaven_. Mankind, and the learned in particular of our age, disdain any
and everything that claims present revelation from God as its origin.
If Joseph Smith had simply stated that he had found the plates in a
mound, and had translated them by his own skill in language, it would
have been regarded as a most interesting and valuable discovery, and
the manuscript would have been purchased at a price, and doubtless
found a place in the most prominent repository of curiosities. But
the record being reserved to come forth as a means of salvation for
the remnant (the American Indians and others of the seed of Israel),
who should be scattered and down-trodden in the last days, it was to
have a more dignified introduction to the notice of mankind, than a
mere chance discovery would have afforded it. And all must concede
that notwithstanding the distaste of the learned, and their prejudices
concerning it, the Book of Mormon has been rendered much more generally
known through the very means of its introduction, {545} than it could
possibly have been if simply discovered in an ordinary way. In fact,
it is to these "objectionable features" that the Latter-day Saints owe
their extensive advertising, and are thus brought prominently before
the public like the Saints of old.

The question naturally arises, why is it considered objectionable for
a book to have an inspired origin? Why repudiate as false a valuable
record of the people in America, because written and brought to light
through revelation, while we accept the record of the people in Asia,
called the Bible, which also claims to be the writings of inspired
prophets and sacred historians, and to contain the word of God revealed
from Heaven? Prophesied of in the Bible, the Book of Mormon stands
side by side with the Asiatic Record, as its witness rather than its
substitute; it endorses by fulfillment some of the grand predictions
therein contained, and bears sacred testimony to the crucifixion,
resurrection and ascension of Christ, and the introduction of the
Gospel as given us by the Evangelists.

Such, then, is the Book which is regarded as an "objectionable feature"
of the religion of the Latter-day Saints; and we claim that instead
of being a "stumbling block," it should be regarded, sustained as it
is by Scriptural history and scientific discovery, as one of the most
convincing proofs of the truth of the Gospel revealed to its translator.

APOSTLES AND PROPHETS. Another "objectionable feature" with some
is the organization of the Church with apostles and prophets. They
cannot deny that the ancient Church was organized in this manner
with an inspired priesthood and led by men "having authority," being
commissioned of Jesus Christ to administer in the ordinances of the
Gospel; and they cannot dispute that unless so authorized their
acts were not recognized by the Lord, nor did they receive the seal
of the spirit. In fact, the very foundation of the Church was this
organization. Paul says, "it is built on apostles and prophets, Jesus
Christ Himself being the chief corner-stone." He even calls Christ an
"apostle," and others call Him a "prophet," showing that He did not
"take this honor unto Himself," but was "ordained of God" to officiate
and acted by Heavenly authority in all His ministry. "As the Father
_hath sent me_, even so now send I you."

Were it not for the "darkness" which was predicted should cover the
minds of the people in the last days, we would be inclined {546} to
marvel at the blindness of intelligent people to these things. That
apostles and prophets should have been deemed requisite for the "work
of the ministry" in the ancient Church, and yet be objects of Christian
ridicule in the last days, is certainly very peculiar! As though
worldly learning had by right taken the place of inspiration, and a
college education legally assumed the throne of divine appointment.
The nineteenth century is nothing if not inconsistent! And no age
has been marked with more flagrant outrages upon common sense in
religious theories and practice, than the one in which we criticise
the Pharisaical Jews for rejecting the Savior, and the Catholics for
assuming a power never delegated to them by the Ancient Church. For
while these are denounced--the one for inconsistency and prejudice, the
other for bigotry and usurpation, the modern "Pharisees"--professedly
the followers of Christ, wag their heads at inspiration and
apostleship, and "sit in high places" and occupy "the chief seats in
the synagogues," assuming themselves to teach the people, without even
presenting or possessing a semblance of authority for so doing. They
scorn any descent of authority from the Romish priesthood as corrupt,
hence lay no claim to a "chain of power" from the Ancient Church; and
if they did, it would be a futile attempt, for the Romish Church,
through which came even what semblance of authority they have, cut off
long ago all her Protestant daughters from fellowship, and severed them
from all rights and claims to the power she held.

Now, when the Latter-day Saints declare a new revelation of the
apostleship, and the re-delegation to man of that sacred power of
the Church, these "learned" gentlemen with collegiate prefixes and
affixes, turn up their theological noses at the words "apostle" and
"prophet," and deem the introduction of such inspired "non-essentials"
as a sacrilegious innovation on the rights of the "modern school"
of theology. Thus we find the world in the anomalous position of
"Christians" fighting Christianity; professed believers of the Bible
making war upon the Bible, religion, and in fact, on the Bible itself;
believers in Christ discarding His doctrines, and parties placing their
hope of salvation in an original form of faith, whose fundamental
principles they ignore and despise! It is for the "faith once delivered
to the Saints" we are called in question! And we may here say, because
we believe in the correctness of the original organization of Christ's
Church, that "investigation into our doctrines is impeded" (?). This
is another of the "objectionable features," which keep, forsooth,
the "intelligent" {547} classes from examining our claims to public
attention, and is deemed a barrier to their embracing the Gospel!

SIGNS FOLLOWING THE BELIEVERS. Another feature of our religion,
which is considered "objectionable" by the religious world, is, that we
claim the necessity for and the existence of the spiritual gifts of the
Gospel, the "signs" which Christ said were to "follow the believer."
We read that after the Savior had risen from the dead, when He was
about to ascend into Heaven from the Mount of Olives, He gave His
apostles a certain commission, which we find recorded in the following
language by St. Mark, in chap, xvi, 15-18: "And he said unto them, Go
ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not
shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my
name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues;
they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing,
it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they
shall recover." And lest any should raise objection to the standard
translation of King James, which has been read in churches ever since
the year 1611, we also give the same passage from the New Version,
published last May, the chapter and verses being numbered alike: "And
he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
the whole creation. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved;
but he that disbelieveth shall be condemned. And these signs shall
follow them that believe: in my name shall they cast out devils; they
shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents, and if they
drink any deadly thing, it shall in no wise hurt them; they shall lay
hands on the sick, and they shall recover."

The above promise evidently furnished us a distinctive mark which
should characterize "them that believe" in Christ's Gospel. It admits
of no other construction than that which is given by the plain
language of the Scripture. But one class of people are promised the
"gifts"--the "believers," but to them the promise is positive, emphatic
and undeniable! It is possible to conceive that persons of sound moral
principle might exercise sufficient faith through prayer to obtain
certain manifestations of God's approval, and still might not be at
the time actual members of the Church, but that the "true believers,"
who have become members of the Church of the {548} Savior, should be
destitute of these gifts is not only an improbability, but from the
words of the Scripture a positive impossibility!

We are led by the Savior's saying directly to the following
conclusions: that the disciples were to preach the Gospel as it had
been taught them by its Author; that some would believe its doctrines
and be baptized, and that those who did so believe would receive the
evidences of spiritual gifts which Christ foretold and described.
There can be no misconstruction of this Scripture, without sacrificing
consistency and stultifying the Divine word. But in order that we may
be still further assured concerning the literal meaning of the Savior's
promise, let us consider whether such manifestations did actually
follow their administrations among the people. For direct record proof
of this we have but to read the two following verses, which close the
above-named chapter: "So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he
was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. And they
went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and
_confirming the word with signs following_. Amen."

But we also find these gifts mentioned in the course of their ministry,
and not merely referred to in a general way, but the special gifts
particularized which were imparted by Divine favor on certain occasions
named. For instances of this kind read the Acts of the Apostles. In
the second chapter it is recorded that they (the Saints) were all with
one accord in one place, "And suddenly there came a sound from heaven
as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they
were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of
fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost, and began to speak in other tongues, as the Spirit
gave them utterance." And we find that the gifts were so marked and
prominent in their effects on this occasion, that Peter had to give
an explanation to the multitude who came together, showing that they
were the blessings of the Holy Spirit, as foretold should belong to
the Christian Church. Then again in the third chapter, we are informed
that as Peter and John went into the Temple, "a certain man lame from
his mother's womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the
Temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into
the Temple; who seeing Peter and John about to go into the Temple,
asked an alms. And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him, with John, said,
Look on us. And he gave heed unto them, expecting to {549} receive
something of them. Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but
such as I have give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
rise up and walk. And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him
up; and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength. And he
leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into the temple,
walking, and leaping, and praising God. And all the people saw him
walking and praising God: And they knew that it was he which sat for
alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple: and they were filled with
wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him." And in
explanation of this manifestation Peter said, "And his name through
faith in his name hath made this man strong, whom ye see and know; yea,
the faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundness in the
presence of you all." Showing plainly that it was by the use of the
name of Jesus, through the "gift of healing," that this blessing was
conferred.

Read the smiting of Ananias and Sapphira at the word of St. Peter,
when they withheld part of the purchase-money at the time of the
consecration of their substance; also the healing power manifested
through the shadow of the apostle (Acts v). Now read in Acts viii, the
miracles performed by Philip, one of the lesser priests sent to baptize
the people of Samaria, verses 6 and 7: "And the people with one accord
gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and seeing the
miracles which he did. For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice,
came out of many that were possessed with them: and many taken with
palsies, and that were lame, were healed." Also read verses from 13 to
17 inclusive: "Then Simon believed also: and when he was baptized, he
continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs
which were done. Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard
that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter
and John: who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they
might receive the Holy Ghost: (for as yet he was fallen upon none of
them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus). Then laid
they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost." Some may
raise an objection here, and say that although the Holy Ghost was said
to be given, in this instance no gifts are specially mentioned. But on
reading the following verses we find that "When Simon saw that through
laying on of the apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered
them money, saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay
hands, {550} he may receive the Holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him,
Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift
of God may be purchased with money. Thou hast neither part nor lot in
this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Repent
therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thine heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity." This plainly
shows that the outpouring of the Spirit produced some evidences of such
a remarkable character as to attract the attention of Simon, or he
would not have been tempted to "offer money" to the disciples for the
power to confer such gifts.

Then read in Acts ix, the case of Saul being healed of his blindness,
under the hands of a certain disciple named Ananias, (this is not the
same who was smitten at Peter's word): "And Ananias went his way, and
entered into the house; and putting his hands on him said, Brother
Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou
earnest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be
filled with the Holy Ghost. And immediately there fell from his eyes
as it had been scales: and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and
was baptized." Also the raising of Tabitha from the dead by St. Peter,
recorded in same chapter.

These were literal fulfillments of the words of Jesus, spoken on the
Mount of Olives. No construction of Scripture can give them any other
than a literal meaning. These works were in reality performed by and
for those who believed. Paul had once been a disbeliever, but now a
"believer," he rejoices in the gifts and shows forth the power of God
in the name of Jesus. And we find that these gifts were not confined
to the Apostles, but that they existed also among the other Saints. In
chapter xiii, 1-3, of the Acts, we are told, "Now there were in the
church that was at Antioch, certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas,
and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen,
which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. As they
ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them. And when
they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent
them away." Now, these men were not apostles who prophesied, though
perhaps prominent in the Church, but possessing the "gifts," the Spirit
spoke through them, and the Church was edified and blessed. Hence none
can consistently say that the "gifts" and "signs" were limited to the
apostleship, {551} and thus argue the sudden cessation of them with the
death of the apostles, or that they were not to be universally enjoyed
by all believers. Besides, the multitudes who, we are told in various
parts of the record, "spoke in tongues and prophesied" when confirmed,
fully show that the gifts were general in their character, and not
bestowed exclusively on a special few of those who believed, or that
any class of "believers" was debarred from enjoying them; but that it
was a foregone conclusion with the Church that these evidences _should_
follow, and that it was a fact in their history that they _did_ follow
belief and obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Instances might be multiplied to prove the existence of the gifts
among the Saints, such for instance as the case of a certain man named
Agabus, who had the gift of prophecy, of whom we read in the Acts of
the Apostles, chapter xxi, 11-13. We also read in Acts xxi, 8, 9, that
Philip the evangelist had _four daughters_, virgins, who possessed the
gift of prophecy: "And the next day we that were of Paul's company
departed: and came unto Csesarea: and we entered into the house of
Philip the evangelist, which was one of the seven; and abode with him.
And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy."
Stephen also who, like Philip, was one of the lesser priests, and not
an apostle, saw at the time of his martyrdom "the heavens opened, and
the Son of man standing on the right hand of God."

These and many other incidents plainly show that visions, prophesyings,
tongues, healing and the general "gifts of the Gospel" were
disseminated among the Saints, both male and female, "severally as
willed by the Spirit." Paul says (1 Cor. xiv, 26, 27), "How is it then,
brethren? when ye come together _every one of you_ hath a psalm, hath
a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation.
Let all things be done unto edifying. If any man speak in an unknown
tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course;
and let one interpret," showing that these gifts were universal among
the Saints, or "believers," and that the possessors had to be at times
checked and instructed in their use.

Added to those cases recorded in the Scriptures, the blessings enjoyed
by the Saints as the "signs following the believer," are mentioned in
a general way by historians. In the _second_ century, St. Iraenaeus
testifies that "the Christians, by the gift of God, cast out devils,
healed the sick, raised the dead, and performed miraculous works in
the name of Christ, in all parts of the world." (See Gahan's Church
History, page 76.) {552} But we find that in the third century, the
government and organization of the Church began to change from the
primitive form established by Christ. At least in detail, if not in
a general way, some of the ordinances were even at an earlier date,
materially changed and modified. Even in the second century, we find
the historian Gahan refers to a change in the ordinance of baptism in
the following pointed language. Speaking of Novation, who was ill,
"he was baptized in bed, _not by immersion, which was then the usual
method_, but by infusion or pouring of water. On recovering he received
not the seal of the Lord * * says St. Pacian, that is to say, the
sacrament of confirmation."--(See Gahan and Mosheim.)

There can be no doubt that this "changing of the ordinances" which had
been established by Christ, as the means of obtaining salvation with
its kindred blessings, gradually produced the cessation of the gifts
among them, that to this, and also the withdrawal of the authority to
confer the Holy Ghost, through the martyrdom of those holding the right
to officiate, must be imputed their absence in succeeding centuries,
until at the present day these evidences of the true Gospel are even
discountenanced by parties claiming to be followers of Christ, and the
Latter-day Saints condemned as presumptuous and wicked for seeking to
possess them, and testifying of their existence in the Church. And it
is lamentable to know that it is considered an "objectionable feature"
of the religion we profess to enjoy these blessed tokens of God's
approval which edified, strengthened and comforted the ancient Saints,
and which Christ declared should "follow them that believe."

Reader, is it not strange that professing Christians should not only
themselves fail to obtain the gifts which are an inseparable evidence
of the Christian religion, but that they should take up arms with the
enemies of Christ in denouncing those who possess them,--considering
the existence of the gifts a bar to accepting the truth, and a
stumbling block in the pathway of obedience? What they despise and
denounce, however, we, the Latter-day Saints, hold as a substantial
evidence of the truth of the Gospel revealed to Joseph Smith, and
a standing testimony against those who "have a form of godliness,
but deny the power thereof." And we reiterate the apostle's advice
when speaking of this class, "from such turn away!" And the writer
of this article desires to add his testimony to the many which have
been recorded in the Church established in our day, through the
Prophet Joseph Smith, that the gifts of the Gospel promised to the
believers are with the Latter-day {553} Saints! That he has seen,
witnessed and experienced them in his own person! That he has himself
been healed under the administration of the Elders, according to the
words of James, recorded in chap. v. 14, 15: "Is any sick among you?
let him call for the Elders of the church; and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer
of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and
if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him." That others
have been healed under his hands instantaneously by the power of God!
That some of his immediate friends and acquaintances have the gift
of tongues, others prophesy, others see visions, and all who are
faithful possess the Holy Spirit, which testifies that these things are
verily true,--that this is the veritable work of God set up for the
preparation of a people to meet the Lord when He comes in power! And he
bears this testimony in all sincerity, knowing that by our words shall
we be justified or condemned, and that both writer and reader will have
to meet them at the last day!

Liverpool, England.

    "_Posterity will yet do us the justice, when our persecutors are
    equally low in the dust with ourselves, to hand down to succeeding
    generations, the virtuous acts and forbearance of a people who
    sacrificed their reputation for their religion, and their earthly
    fortunes and happiness to preserve peace_."

    --_Joseph Smith, July 25, 1836_.

{554}



LATTER-DAY SAINTS FOLLOW TEACHINGS OF THE SAVIOR.

ADDRESS DELIVERED AT THE SALT LAKE TABERNACLE, SUNDAY, DECEMBER 25,
1910, BY PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH.

(REPORTED BY F. W. OTTERSTROM.)

It is with a feeling of great dependence upon the Giver of all Good
that I arise before you, this afternoon, in the hope of saying
something by the help of the Spirit of the Lord, that will be
encouraging to the Latter-day Saints and also a comfort to them with
reference to some of those glorious principles which we have espoused
and which, nevertheless, are very much misunderstood and misrepresented
by our enemies.

We do not fully realize, it seems to me, the simplicity and naturalness
of those great doctrines that are involved in the probation of man,
in his mortal state. Many have sought for the origin of man in his
development from the lower animals or creatures, and it is very
difficult, indeed, to persuade men who are supposed to be scientific,
to believe that the works of God are one eternal round, and that man
is nothing more and cannot be anything less, we believe, than the
offspring of God. No man, however scientific, however learned, however
deeply he may search into the secrets of nature, can ever find out
more than is revealed already, in the Scriptures of divine truth, with
reference to man's origin. Men may speculate, and guess, and suppose
many things, and can argue themselves into queer notions and beliefs
with reference to man's origin, but after all it will only be their
beliefs, or their imaginations or conclusions from human reasoning.
It would be superfluous, no doubt, for me to cite my hearers to the
Genesis in the Bible, where an account is given of man being placed
upon the earth, formed in the image and likeness of God, being made
in His likeness not only male but also female, for the Bible plainly
implies that in order that man should become like unto God, or be
created in His image and likeness, he should be a dual being, that
is, he should be not only man but that his complement or other self
should be woman, thus he was formed {555} in the likeness of God. Man
was placed in the garden that was prepared for him. He was given the
liberty to enjoy and partake of all the fruits of the garden except the
fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and he was told
that when he should partake of that fruit, or if he should, then he
should surely die.

Yet, it was foreordained, and the first man was predestined to partake
of that fruit in order that the greater and real purpose of God might
be fulfilled, for if Adam had kept the law of heaven, by refusing or
refraining from partaking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, he would have remained forever in his innocence, without
power of increase. Therefore, the object and purpose of God would fail
in his being, for the great commandment that was given to him was that
he should multiply and replenish the earth, and have dominion over it
and over all living creatures upon the earth, for he was made lord of
all and above all things that were created of God, or were placed here
on the earth. Man was placed here to be the lord and master of all of
them. Why? Because he was God's child; because he was made or formed
and created in the image and likeness of his Father and, shall I add
here, in the image and likeness of his Mother? If I should say such
a thing it would shock the Christian world, and they would ridicule
the thought or the idea that the original man had anything but a
father, and owed nothing but to his father, for his existence. In the
revelations that have come to us through Joseph, the prophet, and also
those that are contained within the lids of the Bible, we are told
that all things were created spiritually before they were temporally;
in other words, they were created in the other world before they were
placed here--not only man, the child of God, but all the animals that
were placed upon the earth, and the fishes of the sea, and the birds
of the air. All things were formed and had their existence spiritually
before they were formed temporally on the earth, Even the seeds and
herbs of the field had their existence in their spiritual state before
they were planted in the earth.

But when man transgressed that heavenly law, which forbade that he
should partake of the elements of this earth, whereby he should
become of the earth, earthy, then he brought upon himself temporal
death, just as God declared he would do, if he should partake of the
"forbidden fruit." Not only did he bring upon himself the temporal
death, that is, the death of the body, but he also placed himself in
subjection to spiritual death, which death is banishment from the
presence {556} of God into outer darkness where there is weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Through this condition, brought upon
our first parents necessarily--necessarily because it had to be, in
order to carry out the great purpose of God to people the earth--man
placed himself in the most helpless condition, powerless to relieve
himself from the temporal death which he had brought upon himself, and
powerless in and of himself, and through his own wisdom, to escape
even the consequences of spiritual death--absolutely helpless. But we
read, in the new revelation that has come through Joseph, the prophet,
in these latest days, that the gospel which was afterwards, in the
meridian of time, preached by the Son of God, was also preached unto
Adam and to his children in the early stage of man's existence in the
earth. The same gospel of faith in God and in a Savior of the world
and in remission of sin by repentance, and the gift of the Spirit of
God to lighten man in the world, in the path that should lead him
back into the presence of God from whence he had fallen; all this was
taught to Adam by the angels of God who were sent to minister to him
and to reveal to him the plan of life and of redemption. Among other
things, there was established, in the days of Adam, to be continued by
his posterity, the law of sacrifice. They were required to offer the
sacrifice of oxen, and of sheep, and of doves, and of various animals;
and in these sacrifices, which were given to them with commandment
to follow and to observe, the principle was taught them that in the
meridian of time one should be sent, mighty and strong, with power to
redeem and save, who should make the great sacrifice for all mankind.
He would relieve the children of Adam, and all the human family, from
the beginning down to the time of this great Savior, and thenceforth
through all generations of time, until the winding up scene, or until
every son and daughter of Adam should have the privilege of being
redeemed from the fallen and helpless condition into which they had
been placed because of the fall of the first parents.

So, from the time of Adam until the Son of God, whose supposed natal
day we are here, perhaps most of us, for the purpose of celebrating
and of reflecting upon, these sacrifices were offered in anticipation
of His coming, in anticipation of the great sacrifice that He was to
offer, once for all, thus doing away with the shedding of the blood of
animals, of beasts, and of birds, whereby man could be kept in memory
of this great principle of sacrifice which was instituted, from before
the foundation of the world, for the redemption of man from temporal
and also from spiritual death; first, from the {557} temporal death
without any responsibility on his part, or act of his own, without
any required virtue, honor, or worthiness upon his own part. Inasmuch
as death has come upon me--temporal death--not by any act of mine,
and I am not in any way responsible for that condition in which I
find myself; inasmuch as you and I had no hand, in the beginning, in
bringing about the conditions that now exist, we, by the will of God,
and by the power of life and of salvation in the Son of God, shall be
redeemed, every one, from the temporal death, no matter what we are
or who we are. It matters not whether we are learned or illiterate,
bond or free, white or black, old or young, ignorant or intelligent,
we shall all come forth out of the condition that has come upon us
temporally, and we shall have to stand before the bar of the great
Judge, at last, to give an account of our deeds done in the flesh. Next
to this redemption from the temporal death comes our redemption from
the power of the second death, but this redemption will not be brought
to pass in our behalf independently of ourselves. We are responsible
for our own sins and will be held responsible for our deliverance from
them, for they lead to the second death.

I will again tell you what the Scriptures tell us is the second death:
It is being cut off from God; the blessing and privilege of His
presence; it is indeed banishment from God and from His Kingdom, and
from the glory and exaltation, the joy and happiness of eternal life.
That is the second death, and that is what will come upon all men who
reject the redemption that has been wrought for them in the atonement
of the Son of God, whom we call Jesus of Nazareth, the Christ. And who
was Jesus, the Christ? He was both God and man. Can we accept it? Can
we comprehend it? It is very simple to those who will permit themselves
to comprehend it. It is very plain if men will comprehend, firstly,
the fact, that God is the Father of man, spiritually, and that God is
the Father of Jesus Christ, both temporally and spiritually, and that
Jesus Christ is nothing more nor less than the Son of God, begotten of
His Father, as absolutely, and as truly as any child was begotten of
his earthly father. You don't need to mince the matter. How could we
be like God if we were not begotten in His image and in His likeness?
Then this holy man, Jesus Christ, had God for His Father, and He had
for His mother the virgin, Mary, who never knew mortal man until after
the time that Christ was born. He had this human mother for His mother,
and thus were joined together in Him, forever, God and man, and thus
is explained to the human family the connection existing between God
and man, his children, his offspring {558} in the earth. Not only is
God our Father, but Jesus Christ is our brother; and in the spirit
He is the elder brother of the human race, whereas in the flesh Adam
was before Him. Many other prophets, men and inspired persons were
before Christ in the flesh, and yet He was the first born of God in
the flesh; he was God's "only begotten Son" in the flesh. He came into
the world in this way, clothed with double power--power to die, which
He derived from His mother; and power to resist death, if He had so
willed it, which He had inherited from His Father. Thus He had power
both to live forever and also power to pass through the ordeal of
death, that He might suffer it for all men, and come forth out of the
grave to a newness of life--a resurrected being, to be clothed with
immortality and eternal life, that all men might come forth out of the
grave unto life eternal, if they will obey Him. They will come forth
anyhow, either as vessels of honor or as vessels of dishonor. They will
come forth from the grave whether they will or not. They can't help
themselves. We could not help the curse of mortal death coming upon us,
neither shall we be able to avoid or to prevent the resurrection of
this body from that grave; for as God raised from the dead, so will all
mankind.

Then the Latter-day Saints worship God, the Father of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and we are instructed, and we do follow that
instruction, to worship God, the Father, and to call upon His name
for the blessings that we need, in the name of His Son, Jesus Christ.
I do not suppose that there is a Latter-day Saint anywhere who does
not believe, who has not absolutely accepted in his soul the literal
and absolute resurrection of the Lord, Jesus Christ, from the dead.
We accept that; it is a part of our doctrine; it is a fundamental
principle of our religion. On that truth depends our hope of
everlasting life, and, therefore, we have cast our lot into the plan of
life and of redemption and of salvation inaugurated by the Son of God
while He was in the flesh. We depend upon it for our exaltation; upon
it rests our hope of happiness and the privilege of entering again into
the presence of our Father, the Father of our spirits, and enjoying
eternities with Him. Our hope is founded on the great truth that Jesus
rose from the dead and conquered death. Now, a great many people will
argue that this is, in some degree, only mythical, that it cannot be
real or tangible. I shall take the liberty, if you will permit, to look
at the Scripture for a moment with reference to this matter. After
the resurrection of Christ, abundant evidence was given His disciples
and Saints to establish {559} the reality of His resurrection from
the dead. Of course, we have the testimony of the ancient disciples
of Christ with reference to this matter, but that is not all. We read
here the testimony given concerning the resurrection of the Savior,
by Luke, one of the disciples of Christ, who wrote a brief history of
His doings and life. We read here of two of the disciples who went to
Emmaus with the Savior after His resurrection, and knew Him not until
they got there, and He broke bread, then they discovered that they had
been walking and talking with the Lord:

"And they said one to another, Did not our hearts burn within us, while
he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?

"And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found
the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,

"Saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.

"And they told what things were done in the way, and how he was known
of them in breaking of bread.

"And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them and
saith unto them, Peace be unto you.

"But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had
seen a spirit,"--just as a great many professed teachers of religion,
today, claim that He was but a spirit, only a spirit, and that the body
itself does not rise, but that the resurrection from death to life is
the departure of the spirit from the body, the body to return to dust;
and the spirit to return to God, redeemed and resurrected from death
unto life eternal. This is the doctrine of some teachers of religion,
for I have heard them teach and preach it. We believe that the gospel
of Jesus Christ and that the life and mission and works of the Son of
God are far more real and far more tangible than this. So the disciples
of Jesus, when He appeared unto them, were terrified and affrighted,
supposing that they had seen a spirit.

"And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise
in your hearts?

"Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself; handle me, and see;
for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

"And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet.

"And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto
them, Have ye here any meat?

{560} "And they gave him a piece of broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.

"And he took it, and did eat before them.

"And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you
while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were
written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms,
concerning me.

"Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the
scriptures.

"And said unto them, Thus is it written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:

"And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

"And ye are witnesses of these things,

"And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in
the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endowed with power from on high.

"And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands
and blessed them.

"And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them,
and carried up into heaven.

"And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy:

"And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God."

We might refer you to many other passages here. We take this Scripture
as it reads. We testify to the world that the disciple of Christ, the
apostle of the Lord Jesus, the scribe, the writer of this testimony,
was inspired of God to write the truth, and that he did write the truth
and nothing but the truth. Jesus was no spirit risen out of the body,
for the spirit had already departed from the body and returned to
it, and taken it up again. While the body lay in the tomb, according
to divine truth revealed in the word of God here, he was quickened
by the spirit and went and preached to the spirits that were in
prison (1 Peter 3: 18-22), thus fulfilling also the prediction of the
prophets concerning Him, that He was anointed to proclaim liberty to
the captives and to open the prison doors to them that were bound.
So, Christ went to the spirit world where darkness reigned, where the
spirits of men were shut out from the presence of God, where they could
only be ministered to by messengers sent from the Lord, who possessed
a higher and a far more exceeding weight of glory. There He went, and
with Him went the {561} two malefactors who were crucified with Him,
for He said to them that day they should be with Him in "paradise;"
and they were there: not in God's glorious Kingdom, but in the spirit
world, where Christ went. He had this great mission to perform, of
preaching His gospel to the spirits in prison, the same gospel that is
preached to the living, for there is but one plan of life, one gospel,
one faith, one Lord, one baptism, one Holy Spirit, that cometh from
God and that bringeth light and intelligence unto the children of men.
There is only one way; it is the straight and narrow path that leads
back into the presence of God. That is the way that Christ trod; that
is the way that He marked out for His disciples to tread in; and that
is the way that you and I must go in order to obtain the reward that
has been promised to the faithful. But, says one, what a narrow idea
this is. How incompetent is such a plan as this, to reach the millions
and millions of the human family who have, necessarily, died without
knowing the gospel of Christ, without having heard even the name of
Jesus Christ.

How narrow, then, to say that no man can enter into the Kingdom of God
but by the door and through the means that Jesus Christ has offered
to the children of men. But, no, it is not a narrow view; it is the
broadest possible view to take of this matter. Why, how can you, then,
meet the necessities of the children of men, all the myriads of spirits
that have passed away from this mortal stage without the knowledge
of this gospel, without the knowledge of Jesus Christ, without the
benefits of the ordinances of the house of God? We will tell you, for
it has been revealed in its fullness in this dispensation. As Christ
went to preach to the spirits in prison, that were disobedient when
once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the
ark was preparing, in which a few, that is, eight souls were saved by
water, the like figure whereunto baptism doth now save us, so this
same plan prevails today, and the same principle. The great mission
inaugurated by the Son of God is now being prosecuted by ten thousand
thousands of those who have held the Melchisedek priesthood which is
after the order of the Son of God, men who have been endowed with power
from on high to preach the gospel to the spirits in prison. Not a soul
that has ever lived and died from off the face of this earth shall
escape a chance to hear the gospel of Jesus Christ. If they receive it
and obey it, the ordinances of the gospel will be performed for and in
their behalf, by their kindred, or their posterity in some generation
of time after them, so {562} that every law and every requirement of
the gospel of Jesus Christ shall be carried out, and the promises and
requirements fulfilled for the salvation of the living and also for
the salvation of the dead. Mormonism, as it is called, the gospel of
Jesus Christ, as devised by the Son of God, provides that every son
and every daughter of God, every child of the Father, every soul that
has descended from Adam shall have the privilege of hearing this holy
gospel of Christ and shall come to know the truth, that His name, the
name of Christ--Jesus of Nazareth, is the only name under heaven by
which man can be saved, exalted and restored again to the presence and
glory of God the Father.

Through Him, as I have said already, all men that have died shall be
raised again from the dead--every one--and not only shall they be
raised from the dead, but they shall be restored to their perfect
frame. We will go, now, to the doctrines that we have received in the
Book of Mormon and in the Doctrine and Covenants, the revelations that
have come to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and we will find
that every soul shall not only be raised from the dead, but shall be
restored to their perfect frame. There will be no hunchbacks in heaven;
no one-legged or one-armed men there, nor cripples, nor any deformed
sons and daughters of the Father in the celestial glory, for they will
be restored by the power of God and by the principle of life contained
in the gospel of the Son of God. They will all be restored to their
"proper frame" and "perfect form" mark you, "both limb and joint." We
read that, here in this good book, the Book of Mormon (Alma 11: 43-45).
I intended, when I got up, to read you some of the doctrines of Jesus
Christ, contained in this book, but let me say, the people of the world
generally, seem to want to find out some different way from that which
the Lord has designated, in order that they might be saved. Some men
want to be saved without any righteousness on their own part, without
any forgiveness of sin, without any repentance, without humility of
acknowledgment that they are unworthy, except through a remission of
their sins, to enjoy the blessings and inherit the glory of the Kingdom
of God. They even hold out the idea, the erroneous, wicked, pernicious
thought or idea, that the murderer on the scaffold can be ushered into
the presence of God and to the highest glory if he will only say, on
the scaffold, before the drop is cut, that he "believes in the Lord
Jesus Christ." Why, it is infamy; it is abomination; it is the essence
of injustice and unrighteousness.

{563} No man can be ushered into the presence of God in his sins,
and no man can receive a remission of his sins except he repent and
burial with Christ. For God has made us free agents, to choose good or
evil, to walk in the light or in the darkness, as we choose, and he
has ordained it thus that we might become like Him, that if we prove
ourselves worthy of everlasting life and glory in His presence, it will
be because we have repented of our sins and have obeyed and kept His
commandments. And, if we are doomed, or cursed, or cast out into the
second death, into darkness, where the worm dieth not, and the fire is
not quenched, it will be because we have not obeyed the will of God,
nor walked in the light, because we have chosen darkness rather than
the light, and our thoughts were evil and we did not repent, therefore,
we received no forgiveness or remission of our sins. The judgment of
God will be just, and His rewards will be just, for He will reward men
for their merits, and punish them for their wickedness. That is justice
and righteousness; anything short of that, anything more or less than
that would come of evil and would brand the Father of all, the God of
heaven and earth, the just Judge, as unworthy of such titles and of
such glory and greatness and impartiality; for it would not be possible
for a just God to reward men for something that they were not worthy
of, nor to condemn men for what they had not deserved.

Then, again, Jesus told the people at Jerusalem, His disciples and
those who followed Him, that He had other sheep that were not of that
fold, and He must go to them, and they must hear His voice. They must
be taught His gospel, that there might be one shepherd and one fold.
We read His words in this glorious and good book which I hold in my
hand, which was given by inspiration from the Lord. The Book of Mormon
tells us how the Savior of men, after He had ascended into heaven from
among the Jews, descended upon this continent, among the inhabitants
that dwelt here, who had been prepared beforehand by prophets and by
inspired men who had taught them the gospel as they understood it,
and who had foretold them the coming of the Son of man to the earth.
He visited them, and He organized His Church here, as He organized it
over there. He appointed twelve disciples here to preach the gospel
and to lead in matters pertaining to the cause of the Kingdom that
was established upon this continent; and He taught them the same
doctrines--only they are preserved and revealed in somewhat greater
plainness to us--that He taught the disciples and the {564} people
among the Jews. I am going to read you some of the things that the Lord
taught the disciples and the people that were prepared to receive Him,
upon this continent, after His ascension into heaven. Mark you, when He
came to the people here He came as the Son of God, risen from the dead.
He showed to these people also the evidences of His crucifixion. They
had heard of it by the revelations of God; they knew that He had been
crucified, that He had risen from the dead, and that He had established
His gospel and His Church there. They were expecting Him here because
the Lord had promised them that He would come; and He stood upon the
earth, in the midst of them, and taught them His gospel; He ordained
them to His priesthood, conferring upon them His power and authority to
administer for the salvation of the children of men. He sent out those
whom He chose to be His mouthpieces and representatives, among all the
people of this land, to preach this gospel that Jesus had preached to
the Jews and had now preached to the inhabitants of this continent.
He came here as Jesus Christ, resurrected from the dead, clothed with
flesh and bones as tangible as man's, capable of eating the broiled
fish and the honeycomb--which no spirit could partake of, for a spirit
would not do that.

It would not be consistent with the law that governs them for a spirit
to attempt to partake of the gross elements of this earth; but Jesus
could and did do it, for he was both Lord and Christ; both man and God;
possessing the power both of God and of man; and in and through Him God
and man are linked together as one family in the forms that they always
existed, just as they exist now, except at times possessing greater
intelligence than at other times--sometimes barbarians, and ignorant,
or enlightened and taught by prophets and inspired men that were raised
up among them. In this way has God taught the Chinese, the Japanese,
and other peoples of the world in their times and seasons, the wisdom
possessed by men who have been raised up by the Lord and inspired to
instruct the people among whom they dwelt, for their enlightenment
and to the leading of them into moral and righteous paths--not always
conferring the priesthood upon them, but giving them intelligence.
The Lord did not have to confer the priesthood upon Columbus, when He
moved upon him to discover this country, but He called him for that
purpose and moved upon him to accomplish that work, and the man thus
inspired for that work could not help but do it. He could not forsake
the mission that was given him; neither could he cease until he had
accomplished the work. We read {565} that here in this book. We are
told that Columbus was inspired to do the 'work that he did; and so
have many men, in many ages of the world, been inspired of God to do
certain things and teach certain precepts akin to the gospel of Jesus
Christ in order that the people might be brought nearer to the Lord
and that they might not be left to become wholly heathenish and wholly
ignorant, benighted and barbarous.

Now, I hope you will pardon me for detaining you; but I have chosen
a few words that I want to read you, from the Book of Mormon, that
were translated by the gift and power of God, through Joseph Smith
the prophet. You will find a very great resemblance between some of
the words I shall read in this book and those contained in the New
Testament of the Bible. The recorder of the circumstance and the
utterances here referred to wrote:

"And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words unto Nephi,
and to those who had been called (now the number of them who had been
called and received power and authority to baptize, were twelve), and
behold he stretched forth his hand unto the multitude, and cried unto
them saying, Blessed are ye if ye shall give heed unto the words of
these twelve whom I have chosen from among you to minister unto you,
and to be your servants; and unto them I have given power, that they
may baptize you with water; and after that ye are baptized with water,
behold I will baptize you with fire and with the Holy Ghost; therefore
blessed are ye if ye shall believe in me, and be baptized, after that
ye have seen me and know that I am.

"And again, more blessed are they who shall believe in your words
because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me, and that ye know
that I am. Yea, blessed are they who shall believe in your words, and
come down into the depths of humility and be baptized, for they shall
be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a
remission of their sins." Then he continues:

"Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven."

Let me pause just a moment here. Blessed are the poor in spirit--who
do what? Are they blessed simply because they are poor in spirit? No;
don't forget that. Let this rest upon your minds. "Blessed are the poor
in spirit who come unto me." There is the substance of it. There is the
truth: "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven." And thus it is made a little plainer here than
you will find it in the New Testament.

{566} "And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted;

"And blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

"And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be filled"--what with? The Lord tells us here, "Blessed
are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled with the Holy Ghost.

"And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy."

Of all people under the heavens, the Latter-day Saints should be the
most merciful people, the most forgiving, the most charitable, for no
man can more easily forgive and show mercy to his fellow creatures than
he who has received mercy and forgiveness from God.

"And blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

"And blessed are all the peace-makers, for they shall be called the
children of God.

"And blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

"And blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute and shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake,

"For ye shall have great joy and be exceeding glad, for great shall be
your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who were
before you."

Now, I cannot pursue this subject longer. I will say this, that these
are the doctrines of Jesus Christ. These are some of the words that
He uttered to the people upon this continent, and these are the words
that He uttered to the people upon the old continent, or over there in
Jerusalem. Other words He uttered which we will not have time to refer
to; but He taught as never man taught, and the doctrines that He taught
are yet--almost at least--as high above the conceptions of mankind and
their ability to carry them out, as the heavens are above the earth.
Yet, His doctrine is true; His precepts are righteous; His gospel is
the power of God unto salvation; and in proportion as man rises to a
conception, and an acceptance of and obedience to the principles taught
by the Son of God, the nearer he becomes like Him and like the Father
of our spirits and the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He
was God in the flesh; He was Emmanuel or "God with us," the Savior of
the world. The Latter-day Saints believe in Him not only because of the
testimonies borne {567} of Him in the Bible--in the four gospels and
the Epistles of the New Testament, and the predictions of the prophets
in the Old Testament of the Bible, concerning His coining and mission;
not only because of the evidences we have here in the Book of Mormon,
where it is still more plainly given than it is in the Bible, nor
because we also have further and stronger evidences of the divinity of
His mission in the revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith, but also
because we have the testimony of witnesses of these divine things and,
especially, of the divine mission of Jesus Christ, by and from men whom
we have seen in the flesh, with whom we have conversed, with whom we
have associated and whom we know to have been, in their lives, pure,
upright, honest and faithful servants of the living God. Beside all
this we know the truth by the witness of the spirit to ourselves. Now,
may the Lord bless you.

Of course, we understand that this is not, indeed, the natal day of
the Savior. He was not born on the 25th day of December; but this is
the day that has been accepted by the world, at least by the so-called
Christian world, as His natal day, and we have accepted it with them.
It would be difficult, indeed, to break away from it and celebrate the
anniversary of the birth of the Lord on the day that He was really
born. So we meet, today, to celebrate that important event and to
praise His name. I thank my Father in heaven for the faith He has
given me in the divinity of the mission of Jesus Christ. I thank Him
for the blessings of the holy priesthood that He has restored to the
world in this dispensation. I thank Him for the organization of His
Church. I thank Him for the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus, from
baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the
gift of the Holy Ghost, all along to the endowment and sealing and
higher ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which were designed
to prepare men, by ordination, appointment and faithfulness, to dwell
with God in the eternal world. May the Lord bless us and help us to be
faithful always, to the end, is my prayer, in the name of Jesus. Amen.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scrap Book of Mormon Literature,
Volume 2 (of 2), by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCRAP BOOK OF MORMON LITERATURE, VOL 2 ***

***** This file should be named 54298-8.txt or 54298-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/2/9/54298/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Margaret
Willden and Mariah Averett

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

